I will call this meeting to order.
And ask the superintendent to take the role.
DESE here, Dowling here.
Feller Holman here.
Richardson here. Rich here, Smith here. .
Davidson here.
And board member feller is coming.
Late. So if you care to stand and you would
like to join us, you may, for the pledge of
allegiance.
I pledge of allegiance, the flag United States.
For which it stands.
One nation under God.
You didn't do this with Liberty and justice for all.
Thank you.
Just as an opening, I will say, as this is
a public.
Proceeding, unless the board of education specifically votes to enter
into executive session.
The public has the right to hear everything and to
look at all exhibits.
Exhibits, please let us know if you experience any difficulties
with accessibility. As we have members of the district staff
are located in the lecture hall and they can provide
assistance.
The school board works from a prepared agenda.
Which is posted in advance on the district website and
printed copies of this evening's agenda are available near the
entrance of the lecture hall.
Fellow board members are reminded about Robert's rules.
And not speaking more than twice on the same question,
unless given permission by the chair.
The board asks that the public audience refrained from clapping,
booing.
Side comments or other behaviors.
Behaviors that could inhibit the flow of speakers and every
person is entitled.
Entitled to speak their opinion and to feel safe in
the process.
So
as my chair report, I just wanna say a couple
of things.
First I have two apologies to make. And at our
last budget meeting, member Richardson brought up the recommendations from.
The boundaries and configurations meeting.
Which took place in may of 2024.
And I stated that the board did not implement the
recommendations of the committee.
I was referencing the grade level configuration recommendations. And that
was correct, but although we did not implement those, we
did approve other recommendations.
Some of which were also never done.
And I apologize to remember Richardson for my era.
My second apology is to member Dowling. who said
that Redbank village school closed in 2005.
And I said it was much earlier, but I was
wrong.
And I had thought it was much earlier, but I
was incorrect. So I apologize.
The third thing to say is that I've received some
feedback about using the term.
People with brown and black skin. I have many friends
and family members.
With brown and black skin who say we're black, just
call us black.
So when I'm with them, I do.
There are surely multiple ways to reference people.
Who do not look like us. So I try to
ask directly.
So I asked our D E I director who manage
Paolo, who guided me to use the term bipo.
So that's what I will use in the future.
And every time I sit with him, I feel I
receive.
A mini training. And if you are open to that,
please consider.
Setting a time with him and just have a conversation.
I promise you'll learn something.
So for all these things, I thank you for your
patience and your understanding.
I want to give some important dates. So first.
March 16th, which we apologize.
It has gone back and forth from being.
From non existing to being.
A workshop to being
an open conversation. That's what it is right at this
moment.
But that could change tonight.
Depending upon what happens.
So that's March 16th at 6:00 PM. And right now it is
set for the high school learning commons.
Commons. We have a board workshop.
On non-biased training for hiring.
That will be done on Wednesday, March 16th at five 15
in the learning commons. And that's training that's for the
board who will be.
Hiring for our new superintendent.
And that was postponed from February 4th.
On March 23rd, we have another workshop which we have scheduled
at 6:00 PM. And that will be at the red bank
community center.
And then we have our.
Last at this moment.
Final workshop March 30th.
Also here at 6:00 PM at the high school lecture hall.
Our April regular meeting is April 13th.
Also here. And then we have the city council budget.
Workshop, April 14th in city.
Chambers. So
yes.
So the other things I.
Wanted to say a couple other things.
So I want to add that the search for the
new superintendent continues.
Continues. And I wanted to clarify for everyone the school
board with the two student members.
Will be the only people who will conduct interviews.
Interviews zeal, the consulting group who is assisting us, recommended
a confidential process.
And
that includes only the board members.
Only the school board interviewing.
And that's why we did involve all constituent groups.
In the search we held interviews.
Interviews conducted focus groups sent out surveys through thought exchange.
And held both in person and virtual opportunities.
Our process was public and transparent.
Explaining how we would proceed, including the selection of zeal.
The press release the leadership profile in the community letter.
All stated that the board would be the only people
interviewing. So the board agreed to this process and has
been open about it from the start.
I'd like to highlight a few other things.
That, that I have done over the past few weeks
and to recognize the work in our district.
So first in February on February 17th.
I attended bridge to hospitality and invitation by Aaron Krevi
with adult education.
It was an amazing experience. It was meeting with students
who were practicing their interview skills for working in hospitality.
And, and it was a, it was a learning experience
for me. It was a wonderful group of students and
it was a great experience. And I thank you for
that, Erin.
On February 25th, I attended a unified basketball game, which was
incredibly uplifting.
And I want to thank Todd Livingston. The.
Athletic director, because I came in a few minutes late
and he shared with me the video.
Of singing the national Anthem by one of the players,
which was really quite uplifting.
Also that night.
I attended the south Portland city business awards.
And even though that was not an event that was
held by the school.
It was a fabulous opportunity to witness the south Portland
city awards.
And the business of the year went to Taj, which
many of you know, as a fabulous Indian restaurant.
In south Portland, it's immigrant owned.
And psychy more is a former student of mine. So
I was particularly proud.
To be able to be part of that with him
and to give him a big hug and to celebrate
with him. So that was wonderful.
And I also on the 26th attended the girls and
boys basketball. I mean the girls and boys track banquet.
Banquet and we will be celebrating the boys winning.
The state championship for the second time in three years.
At our April meeting.
And February 27th, I attended the high school assembly.
On black history month. Angela Kabisa who was not here,
but she was tonight, but she was one of the.
Fabulous dancers and a poet reader.
And it was a very powerful experience. And so I
want to thank Karen B Brenner from the high school
office for alerting me to this great event. She's also
responsible for the unified basketball as well.
So we are now at the opportunity to recognize Thomas
Schmeling.
Who is here as
our retiring.
Crossing guard. So I want to.
Say a few things about Thomas first. I have the
honor of recognizing him.
As one of our crossing guards.
Guards and Thomas, Jay Schmeling, someone who has done.
One of the often silent, but most critical jobs in
our district.
He has served as a crossing guard at frost and
main street.
And until very recently work that he did earlier with
his wife in Portland.
Tom did this work well after retirement and I'm particularly
grateful to officer Rocko Navarro for telling me about Mr.
Schmeling.
I'm going to give others a chance to speak
about Tom, but let me tell you a few things
that I learned about him.
Some from my visit at his home, where he lives
in south Portland.
And others from his daughter, Mary, who was with him
tonight.
So Tom shared stories as a crossing guard.
Knowing every student's name who crossed.
And watching out for all of them.
Often a dangerous responsibility.
Tom crossed students safely, thousands of times.
Always always keeping them safe.
While Tom loved serving as a crossing guard, he has
other talents and passions to.
For many years, he's been an avid bird watcher.
And something that often goes with bird watching. He has
a passion for photography.
I saw many of his photographs that he had taken.
And loving photography myself. I was mesmerized.
And often forgotten art.
Tom loves clocks, which he has repaired for years and
his apartment.
Is filled with them. I mean, when I say filled,
I'm talking.
Filled. Okay. I stood up at one point and he
said, well,
there are eight clocks on the wall, right where you're
standing. I just looked in front of me.
And counted in a very small area. There were eight
clocks, but he also had grandfather clocks, cuckoo clocks, wall
clocks. They were everywhere.
He also loves singing.
Particularly Elvis songs and he has a love of impersonating
him. I fantasized about getting him to do that tonight.
So that's why I said maybe we could get him
to do a number.
His sign talent, his side talent is also trying to
make people laugh.
Tom is an early bird, always on time, wherever he
goes. Although he told me tonight that his daughter likes
to be fashionably late. So that's why they were clearly
in this struggle of getting here.
I made sure to get here early.
Because I knew he would come with time to spare.
He loves getting breakfast at Marcy's at IHOP and Becky's
diner. So I guess we have to get him to
Q street.
When his wife was alive, they worked for the Portland
school district.
As paired crossing guards.
Guards saving their money to go for breakfast for their
cruise vacations or travel. And they travel to Spain and
Bermuda.
His wife loved her kids by Reiki school.
And Tom would be at one corner of the west
end and she would be on spring street and Brackett,
and every morning he would drop her off and then
go to his corner.
So it was quite sweet that they were kitty corner
across the neighborhood.
Tom heads, the garden club at the Betsy Ross house.
He hosts both bingo and movie nights.
Often creating special posters to get people interested.
He worked as a crossing garden, south Portland for the
past four years.
Again, holding one of the most important jobs in the
district.
Helping kids to get to school.
Safely. I can hardly think of a more important job.
A job he did until the ripe age of 83.
Wow, before we go further, I'd like to invite anyone
else to speak about Tom.
Tom. So Rocco, you're gonna go first. yeah, no,
no. You're gonna come up to the podium right here.
you're gonna introduce yourself and then you can talk
about him. officer Navarro with the traffic unit could
always count on, on Tom Rainer shine. He was always
there.
And I tell my crossing guards. A lot of times,
if it's raining or snowing, you know, sit in your
car, stay warm, drink your coffee, just keep an eye
on your location.
When the kids come up, you know, we can cross
'em, but Tom never would take me up on that.
He would stand out there pouring rain.
Sleet everything. And I used to say, Tom, you know,
sit in your car, stay warm, but he was a
trooper.
We miss him and we can't. Thank you enough for.
You know your sacrifice. You've given us some big shoes
to fill. I'm actually filling in for him in the
mornings until we can find another crossing guard. If anybody
knows of anyone, let me know little advertising. Well here.
Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, one of the most like.
Rosemary said one of the most important positions.
Positions in the PD is crossing guards. We have eight
locations and I can't say enough good things about 'em.
We love him. Thank you, Rockwell.
So are you going up, Mary? I'm? Sure. .
Hi, everyone.
My son went to school here and I was a
substitute. And Mary, just give your name and oh, Mary.
Hi, I'm Mary. My son went to school here and
I was a sub here as well, but my dad.
Cherished being a crossing guard. And so did my mom.
It was very sweet to see them bundled up. And,
you know, we know how main weather is in.
January February, March, and they got their trackers on and
they're all bundled up and I drive by and see
them all, you know?
With their signs. And, you know, they did this for
over 10 years because being in Portland and then in
south Portland, and it was really hard to like, you
know, see my dad.
Finally kind of get to the point where he couldn't
do it anymore, but.
It kind of broke his heart. So it was hard
to cuz it was something he looked forward to every
single day.
And, and he would check in with me when he
got home. Oh, I had a great day. Only had
two kids today, or, you know, even though there wasn't
a lot of kids, like on his spot, I know
that like he truly connected with each and every one
of them and it was by special. And he was
talk about trying to make jokes with them and bond
with them. And.
I think it's really important for all those little things
for kids to kind of have those.
People that they connect with, even if it's not their
teachers, just like the people that are the day-to-day that
kind of get them to and from. So.
I know that this has been a really like important
part for my dad to look forward to.
Just being a part of the community and.
Truly, I think loves Rocco.
, you know, you know, you'd be like Rocco, I've
talked to Rocco all the time and you know, I'm,
I'm a part of the police and they, they know
what I'm doing and they know everything about, you know,
the hard work that I'm doing. And, and so it
was really super special.
For him to be a part of the community. So
thank you so much for having him and honoring him
today. It's really special.
Thank you, Mary.
Hello, I'm Rebecca stern. I'm the principal of the middle
school. And I wanna say thank you to Tom and
to all of our crossing guards and all of the
folks.
On behalf of all of the staff at south Portland.
We are so grateful to all of the people who
are helping keep our students safe and our staff as
well and our community. So thank you so much. I'm
so glad that you were able to do this for
us. Thank you. Thank you.
So there's a picture of Tom up there on site.
Just so you can get it, get a handle.
And I'm going to give him a certificate and the
certificate says it's a certificate of appreciation.
And it says the board of education of the city
of south Portland.
Recognizes Thomas da.
Thomas J Schmeling I'd love saying that name.
For his work as a crossing guard at the schools
in south Portland.
Guiding students safely to, and from school.
Day after day and contributing to one of the most
important times.
In a child's life. So if I can have Tom
come up to the podium,
and, and
Stephanie's gonna take some pictures and then we'll have Mary
come up and Rocko come up as well.
I fall down a lot. That's my it's. Alright. Cause
I'm gonna have you just turn this way. We're gonna
turn.
If you can turn towards.
Towards there you go.
Okay. And if you hold, I'm gonna have Mary and
Rocco come up as well.
Thank you and thank you very much. And I'm gonna
bring.
Thank you very much.
so that's a nice start to a nice positive start
to a potentially a difficult meeting. So thank you. And
Rocko, if you wanna help Tom out your, your he'd,
he doesn't have to.
Sit through the rest of this, but.
But yeah, if you can carry that. Thank you, Mary.
Thank you so much. Again, thank you very much.
Over 80.
Thank you, Tom. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Okay. And we're going to go next to the report
of the student representative, Alex Davidson.
Hello, everyone. I don't have anything fancy prepared. I'm just
gonna share the updates from.
Each of the principals starting off with brown school.
They continued to provide engaging and inclusive experiences for students.
Students this Friday, March 6th, spark dance will present an interactive
program in the gym.
Or I think this was yeah, last week the updates
are from last week. So if the dates are off,
don't be too alarmed.
In the gym promoting.
Participation and inclusivity.
Last week classroom celebrated the hundredth day of school with
the creativity.
And enthusiasm making all
milestone fun and memorable for all.
Additionally, our brand school skates program concluded another successful year.
Providing equitable access to winter sports while encouraging healthy.
And active participation.
Next moving on to Dyer elementary.
Dyer has a busy
March for students and families.
We kicked off our road, athon.
Monday three, two.
With a whole school stop, drop and read.
They also kicked it off.
As a community on March 5th with.
Books and bites books and bites event.
And then they had a teacher and family guest readers.
Readers bookmark making and Ms. Jess from the public library.
Who was there as well. Next, moving on to Kayla.
Kayla had a wonderful all school community meeting filled with
joy and school spirit.
Our kindergarten students kick things off by warmly greeting everyone
and singing a song about kindness.
While proudly wearing their kindness capes.
Capes. We also launch reading in March with the theme,
Calor readers, champion kindness.
Which will include many fun activities, such as a reading.
Theme spirit week and a character parade.
The celebration wrapped up with the long waited fourth grade
parade of floats.
On sphere robots, a creative event that had been postponed
several times and was well worth the weight.
Moving on to skilling.
Skilling is marching.
Into reading this month with literacy and reading activities and
surprises planned throughout the month.
We are encouraging reading at home with tips for families
and are asking families and staff members to share pictures
of what reading looks like for them at home.
These pictures will make a community bulletin board.
That will be on display on March 19th.
For our literacy and math night.
The theme this year is learning is snow much fun.
.
We are also using the month of March to refocus.
On our school-wide expectations of being respectful, responsible, and kind.
Being safe is always a focus.
Each week, we will focus on one expectation that students
will earn Skyhawk tickets for.
As a part of a grade level competition.
The grade with the most tickets at the end of
the month will earn a special whole grade reward.
And to reinforce
for our students that our school-wide expectations apply to all
members of the skilling community.
Students will have tickets. They can distribute to staff.
We are excited for a month full of reading.
Some friendly competition and celebrations.
Next moving on to small.
Small elementary school had a celebration of learning.
Night for families on March 5th.
Students shared their final projects related to the grade level.
Interdisciplinary units.
Families also had the opportunity to participate in some hands
on stem activity.
Activities related to these units. It was a fan. It
was fantastic to see so many families participating.
In this celebration, we will be kicking off our school-wide
readathon on March 16th and can't wait to see.
How many minutes our students are able to collectively read
from March 16th through March 27th.
Our buildings and grounds club has been hard at work
planning for how to spruce up a outdoor environment.
They have recently installed an outdoor xylophone that they made
and are discussing other options for how they can.
Help create a more engaging outdoor setting for all.
Moving on to south Portland, middle school.
S P M S has been busy with many fun
events, including.
Grade seventh and eighth.
At seventh and eighth grade dance.
Fifth and sixth grade have one leader in the spring.
A great career day, where many student.
Or community partners talked to students about their career paths
and our first middle school unified basketball game, which brought
staff, students and community members alike to the gym for
an exciting match against OC Oxford hill Hills.
It has been a good month to be a shark.
Now, moving on to south Berlin high school.
S P H S had a wonderful few weeks.
We want to first congratulate and thank our fantastic BSU
for hosting and celebrating.
Black history month culminating in a school-wide assembly on Friday.
Mark February 27th.
This past week, south Portland high school.
Hosted the one act festival.
Where the drama club performed, their one act.
Hearts like planets, this
is coming off our first ever fine arts night on
March 4th.
Featuring the one act play.
Musical performances, art displays and more.
This week, we look forward to kicking off our graduation
season on Wednesday, March 11th.
With our senior family night, senior financial fitness fair, and
senior graduation meeting.
Tomorrow night though, we will.
Welcome the south Portland high school class of 2030.
Our current eighth graders to step up night.
And that's all I have. So thank you.
Thank you very much, Alex.
And we will go to the report of the superintendent.
Hello.
Tonight, I've got a couple of celebrations and recognition.
In terms of music in our schools month that we're
in now right now.
And appreciation out to our.
Music educators. And secondly, national.
Social work week is happening or has just happened.
And we also want to.
Send out appreciation and thanks to our social workers.
Next on the
superintendent's report is update on the 20 26 27.
Budget development. And for this, we're gonna transition.
To the
to the.
Projector down there and do I just.
And then I'll return and pick up on the rest
of the.
Reports.
Dr. Entwistle. Did you wanna start with any remarks on
the budget or would you like me to begin? Just
some, just some quick, quick remarks.
Remarks. I wanted to say that on behalf of our
team, I'd like to acknowledge and express.
Our gratitude for
the community's continuing engagement in our school budget.
Workshops and budget forums.
Forums as well. We'd like to acknowledge.
Receipt of ongoing requests from the public and community.
For both data and specific questions that they have, and
they are looking for answers for and submitted by way
of the school website budget page.
In preparing each of the.
Budget related presentations.
Tonight's including
tonight's we review for possible inclusion.
Data that can, that we can include, that's been asked
for.
And to answer questions.
Questions that we have an opportunity to answer in the
context of that particular meeting.
And, and that will be the way, same for tonight.
It's been
rewarding to see us make some progress, some good progress.
I would say in moving through these requests.
Requests the presentation, like the presentation tonight.
Like the earlier ones rep.
Represent the work of our entire team of directors and
administrators.
And it's been nice to be able to work with
them.
And, and, and really
I've appreciated their talents.
Talents. They've all had a role in creating and shaping
the important information that will be shared here this evening.
Now transfer down there.
All right. And the presentation for this evening, like the
others that we have used is linked.
Online, if anyone would like to be able to view
it from home from the 70 or so folks.
That are in the document right now. I think people
are finding it, but it is on the FY 27
page.
I'm Johanna prince. I'm the assistant superintendent.
And tonight I am going to present the slide deck
to give you a full overview of the FYI 27.
Budget as Dr. Entwistle shared. However, it is representative of
a team that has put this together.
With the budget constraints that we.
Had from the, both from city council and from the
school board.
In order to reach a 6% tax increase.
That meant we needed to prepare a budget that had
a 3% increase.
In operating costs.
That change has to do with the amount of revenue
that we have. And I'll talk more about that in
a minute.
So the budget that we are presenting tonight.
Represents 2.4 million of investment.
Into our school system above what we are expending in
FY 26.
And I'm going to walk through what have been the
major drivers.
Of the large increase we were facing.
How we've approached.
Assembling a reduction plan.
And then a timeline looking forward.
Again, we have seen this slide deck.
Before, but we have now added so that you can
see that.
While we are facing a reduction.
In the role forward budget.
We are investing more money in the proposed plan in
our schools for next year.
The blue is the local funding.
And then the red and the yellow are federal funding.
For special education and through our title or ESEA grants.
So
here on slide four. I wanna talk a little bit
about the constraints that the team was facing.
This year so that folks can understand where the numbers
have come from.
So
on the right hand side of the.
Screen that
where the green arrow, the column, the green arrow is
pointing to.
Is if we had taken.
All of our existing programs.
Programs forward and inflated for next year's salaries.
Salaries assumed cost.
Increases.
We would have at the yellow arrow, we would've been
facing.
A 14% increase to the amount of spending.
Down at the bottom of this screen, though. It's important
to note.
That the tax increase would've been 21.
Percent with that budget in the right hand column.
The major difference that we are facing and why we
are looking at a much.
Higher tax increase this year.
Is the starting use of fund balance.
Ballots. We do not have fun balance.
Which is our savings account to contribute.
So the, the budget that you are seeing.
Tonight is the one that is written in the current
FY 27 column.
Again, representing a 3.3.
Overall increase still the zero fund balance.
And with an anticipated
impact for the school portion of taxes of just under.
6%.
What's important to note.
Is down at the bottom again with the red arrow.
If you follow across there.
The tax increase.
Has stayed relatively stable.
Over the last five years.
But the budget that you are looking at.
Is the smallest increase. If you look across the row
at the yellow arrow.
Again,
the major difference is the amount of money that the.
We have decided to use.
From our fund balance to add to the state revenue
and our limited other revenue.
Sources. So I think it's important to note that while
the tax increase stays level.
This is indeed the smallest percentage increase that the.
Board would take forward.
If indeed we go with this model or a similar
model with this figure.
In the last five years.
Wanted to talk through what some of the major drivers.
Are of why we're seeing that budget increase.
About 3 million of that is from contractual wage.
Increases. And I'll break that down on the next slide.
In addition, it is the health insurance projected increases, which
we will not know the actual figure.
Until the last week of March or the first week
of April.
We also have identified capital expenses that are urgently needed
for next year.
Increased insurance costs.
Electricity was under budgeted in FY 26. And we have
corrected for that in FY 27.
The budget that you are looking at.
Includes just the first payment on the athletic.
Bond for just under a hundred thousand.
And then we are deferring 300,000 of that.
To future years. So it's the smallest possible payment.
To move forward with that project that was voted on
by the public.
That we can include in this year's budget.
We have
added a bus in Maine.
Bus purchases you purchase in one year and it's a
reimbursement the following year.
We did have a bus in an accident.
This year and we have not.
Replaced any buses in our fleet since 2023.
We do feel it's an appropriate ask, even in a
time.
That we are facing a budget shortfall.
But wanted to note that it is included.
Included as we think about.
Contractual wage increases.
Increases three of our units.
Completed negotiations this year.
And I'm including here, what some of the outcomes of
those negotiations are.
And also prior negotiations.
And I say all of this in the spirit.
That everyone who sat at the negotiating tables.
Tables, sat and negotiated in good faith.
This is not an effort to.
To blame any part of that process?
Associations did a wonderful job.
Advocating for appropriate wages.
Wages for their members and the, the board and the
administration that joined in that.
Sought to find a compromise to ensure that we have.
The best possible labor pool here in south Portland.
That being said, it does become a constraint for us
as we construct our budget.
So in the left hand of the top table.
You are looking at what's the contractual.
Raise to the base pay.
So it ranges from four to 5%.
On the units.
That are represented, however,
in column two in the middle.
When you consider the fact that an average employee.
Is not only experiencing the raise in the base pay.
But they are gaining a year of experience.
The impact to the individual.
Is greater than the contractual.
Raise. And so
that is an important thing for us to consider.
The plan that we have in front of you today.
Puts us on a path to financial sustainability.
But because of that.
Sort of dual
increment that happens in our labor units of the increase
to the base.
Plus a step or even a lane advancement.
Means that we are going to.
Have to continue.
To look at our fiscal constraints in future budgets.
Budgets. So in column three, what you have, there is
the number of members for those units.
That are active in FY 26.
And then if you take those wage,
increases forward to next year.
The column four represents.
The increase to our local budget.
As a result of those wages.
Wages. So again,
I started by saying that all total, the budget we're
bringing you tonight is a 2.4 million increase.
If you add all of those numbers there, you're over
that increase. And that is going to.
Become clear when I talk about the fact that.
There are, are needed reductions in our force in order
to meet.
The budget.
Constraints. We have
down at the bottom. Just a reminder that we have
a group of employees who are considered non bargaining.
Some of those are directors and central.
Office you'll recall that that group this year took a
zero.
Percent salary increase as a result of the decision the
board made in the spring.
The other non bargaining.
Roles experienced a 4% increase this year.
And we're proposing moving forward with a 3% increase for
that unit.
It's not really a unit for that group of people.
In the FY 27 budget.
So I'm gonna zoom out for a second now to
talk about the revenue.
Side of state funding or the revenue side of funding
and in particular state funding.
There are are many folks.
Who ask us the question around doesn't the state pay
for 55% of education.
Across the state.
The there is funding for 55% of the educational model.
That the department of education uses.
Uses that is not 55% of a district's wishlist. It
is applying a formula.
Through the essential programs and service model.
That uses a series of criteria.
In order to calculate.
What does the, the state formula.
Indicate is the appropriate.
Amount for a district.
This it's widely known that this is below.
The actual cost to operate a school district.
And even just today, there was a hearing on LD
2 26, which is an act to amend the essential programs
and services, school funding formula.
As it's known to be problematic.
The board members.
You have a printed copy of what's known as the
ed two 70.
Nine in your budget materials that I handed out.
Members of the public. You can download the ed 2 79
for this year and any past year and any school
district in Maine, if you would like to compare us
to.
The funding for another district.
The funding formula is incredibly complicated.
And I am. I'm not going to go into.
Detail with it. What I do want to point out
though.
In the green on the slides is the fact that
the state of Maine.
Assumes some ratios should be in place.
For how we staff a school.
Those ratios are not what south Portland uses.
Uses and in the blue box.
Our actual number of staff is compared to the.
Suggested state formula.
And in the pink box.
You'll see.
As we are off from the expected.
Formula. We only get a percentage of available dollars.
So the wider, the discrepancy is.
Between what the state believes you should have.
And what the district has.
The lower, the percentage of that amount of money.
That you get into your funding formula.
So wanted to point that out.
That
next year. If our ratios become closer in alignment to
the state formula.
It could mean an there is the potential that our
state funding.
Does increase in addition on page.
Two, there are also weighted categories.
For how a district's
district's portion or allocation of state funding is calculated.
That include our students below.
The poverty line are multilingual learners.
Learners and also on page three.
Adjustments for our special education costs.
And high out of district special education.
Costs finally on page five, this is probably the most
important page to understand.
In the state model.
The state model suggests
suggests that 48 million just over 48 million.
Is an appropriate amount of money for the district of
south Portland.
To spend on education based on their formula.
In that model.
We would receive 22%, almost 23%.
Of the available funding.
Based on the state's calculations.
However, our actual cost.
Next year is 75 million.
Meaning that for next year.
The revenue that we get from the state of Maine.
Will only cover about 20% of our expected.
Costs. So I think it's important for folks to.
Understand that
that 55% is not.
Experienced, similarly in every district.
And even within that 55% it's of the state's funding
model, it is not of the local.
Allocation or local model.
The second variable that I talked about.
Before that I want folks to understand.
Is the fund balance.
Fund balance is a district's savings.
Savings account and
at the end of a year.
If there is unspent money, because potentially we didn't fill
a position or a cost came in lower than we
expected.
Than that money moves into your fund balance.
Over the last four years.
We have made choices.
To draw down the fund balance to offset tax increase.
What that means. And you can see in the bottom
row is we've left ourself in a position.
Where we will not have any money.
In fund balance to begin next year.
Is our anticipation.
Clearly this year, that is why we went into a
budget.
Freeze early to try and.
Avoid the case where we run.
Into the red in that bottom line.
But we don't know that yet.
It's what we continue to model.
And I think with this.
FY 27 and beyond are critical years.
For us to rebuild fund balance.
The city of south Portland.
Has a minimum of 9% unassigned fund balance.
With a maximum of 12%.
In the coming years, I would like to see.
The administration, the board and the public.
Collaborate on new board policy.
That sets thresholds.
Thresholds that will help us avoid this situation.
Again, by setting internal board policy.
Of a minimum balance.
Or a expected percent to use in an annual year.
I think we will be able to.
Again, put ourselves back onto a path for.
More sustainable future.
In addition, the leadership team wants to recommend to the
board.
That in prior years.
We have seen where
when health insurance comes in.
Under budget, we attempt to make final adjustments.
In the proposed budget.
To sort of buy back positions that we lost.
As difficult as a recommendation. This is to make given
the scope of the rec the reductions that we're facing.
A sincerely think we have to consider.
That that is not the approach we take so that
we can be on a path.
To not having the smallest possible margin every year.
So I'm going to move into the overview of the
reductions.
And
walk people through the plan.
What you are looking at here on slide.
16 is
across our units the last two years. So FY 25.
And then FY 26.
Is the year we're currently in.
And then what you are looking at is.
What would the size of that unit be?
In FY 27.
And what's the change in the number of positions and
the percent change.
To the unit I'm gonna move forward to the next
slide, because I do think it's important to add.
As the team has been working.
On this, we have
tried to maximize our potential.
To take advantage of vacant positions.
Positions known resignations or
retirements. And so what you'll see here.
Is again in columns, one, two, and three. Those are
repeated from the prior slide in columns, four and five.
Those are known vacancies.
Retirements or resignations.
Which means that the
percent impact for individuals.
Individuals is lower in some of those groups.
Then the full
impact of the reduction in force.
The plan.
That we have in front of you to meet the
budget targets tonight.
Does represent reductions across every area.
Of the organization.
Last week we focused on the elementary school.
Reconfiguration model. And I'll speak more about what's what's in
the current proposal tonight.
If we move forward with the model.
That we have refined for tonight.
That does represent
represent about 43% of the reductions. Again, across that 8.4 million.
All of those other areas.
Areas also have impacts.
However, as we get into those units.
We need the opportunity to.
Notify impacted individuals.
Individuals and I'll, I'll talk more about that.
Because again, the nature of those.
Re reconfigurations.
We want to make sure that we have a chance
to notify the impacted individuals. And we also.
Before we can release more detail on the elementary school
proposal.
Also need a chance to.
Notify the employee positions that we believe will be impacted.
So I'm gonna
tuck next about
what is in the elementary school.
Reconfiguration in the proposal you have in front of you
tonight.
I think first one note I wanted to highlight because
we've received some questions about it.
In terms of the matrix that we.
Used last last week.
And I think it's important to note that that matrix
was developed for the leadership team.
To help us formulate the recommendation that came in front
of you.
In no way. Do we suggest that that is the
only matrix?
That could or should be constructed to consider proposals.
Proposals, but for us, as we had to do the
work of bringing proposals forward,
we constructed it in order to make sense of.
What we would consider
again, the leadership team continues to support consideration of long-term
facilities.
And wanna collaborate with the board to adopt a policy.
With regards to funding capital.
Improvements, just like I mentioned earlier.
That we need new policy.
On fund balance.
I think creating guidelines.
That we set in policy.
That help us think about a long-term strategy for capital.
Improvement will
again, put us in a better position. Moving forward.
The feedback that we have heard.
Was that we should explore a model.
That did not include a closure of skill and.
However, we continue to look at funding of.
Facilities as an important criteria.
As the fewer dollars we spend on facilities.
The more dollars there are for staffing.
So as we left the meeting last week,
there was interest in proposal 1.3 and 1.4.
And when we looked at the funding costs in the
coming five years.
For dire and Kayla Dyer does have.
More roof repair that is needed.
And so that is the.
The school that we've modeled closure of in the proposal
that you have here.
Additionally, we heard interest in keeping the schools.
Either pre-K through four or K through four.
So I'll talk more about that.
One thing to note in the third.
Bullet here is that
a a refinement that we've made since last week.
Is looking at minor adjustments in school attendant zones.
To maximize our existing footprint.
And minimize the use of.
Portables. So we believe with adjustment kind of on the
margins of the dire and Calor school zones.
Zones that we may be able to.
Accomplish this revision.
With the pre-K.
K through four or K through four model.
So
again, what's in the.
The mathematical proposal that you have this evening.
Is a configuration of skill.
Being a K through four school.
And the other three remaining elementary schools.
Being pre-K through four.
Again, keeping in mind.
That one of the classrooms planned for expansion, which I've
noted as being at small.
Would be through partnership with headstart.
Headstart. So does not represent local cost.
One does represent a local cost increase.
In addition.
We have heard the request.
For information about the changes in roles.
Over the last few years.
As people have sought to understand.
What's happened to our staff.
On slide 25.
What we have tried to construct there.
Is an explanation of
how those roles have changed.
Or grown over the years.
Most notably.
We have attempted different configurations.
Of what used to be one role of a director
of finance.
Human resources and operations.
And then that changed.
And we discontinued the role of director of transportation.
When we brought online the director of operations.
And safety. So
again, hopefully this, this helps with the request that the
board and other members of the public had.
To understand how these roles.
Have changed.
The proposal in front of you tonight.
Does hold a place value.
For a reduction of a director position.
I think we learned
last year that the process that we will undergo in
the, in the coming weeks together.
May shift the calculus of.
Where that position should come from.
So, what we wanted to share publicly is the fact.
That these are the criteria that as we see.
The impacts across the unit.
Will be looking at the scope of responsibility, the direct
reports and staffing oversight.
Budgetary oversight required expertise in qualification.
Accountability for outcomes.
Outcomes and risk for error, which in could potentially include
looking at safety finance.
Or legal compliance as we make the decision on which
position there.
In addition on slide 27.
We wanted to present.
The the change in
staffing between fiscal 21 and fiscal 24.
There were a about
50 teaching positions added.
Those positions were largely added through COVID era dollars.
And as a result of.
The influx of multilingual students.
Students that we welcomed.
So you can see those and then you can see
that there's been some decrease, but then obviously a significant
decrease for next year.
Additionally during that same time.
We increased our educa, our EdTech.
Pool and our clerk pool.
To to support our expanding student body.
So
in terms of further detail on reductions.
As I shared.
The the next step for the superintendent's team.
Is to work on notification.
To potentially impacted staff.
In this proposal, we understand the enormous.
Impact that this proposal has on our community.
We have already begun the process.
Of reviewing seniority lists and reduction in enforced clauses.
Clauses with our associations.
We have meet and consult.
Meetings with each of our units.
This week.
Where we anticipate sharing the list of potentially impacted staff
through reduction in force.
During that time.
We
we share how we have interpreted.
The seniority clause and the reduction in force.
And then the association is given time outside that meeting.
To also double check that work and come back and
let us know if their interpretation is the same with
the reduction in force clauses.
Clauses. We also have begun the process of collaborating on
the delivery.
Of message and process for notification.
During our conversations this week, we will continue to refine
that.
With our association leaders.
Right now and anticipated model.
Is that there's a notification to individuals.
Individuals and then to follow a goal of a prescheduled
meeting with the staff.
Member their director or principal and association representation.
That will be pre-scheduled and would be offered to the
impacted employee.
The employee will have the choice to either accept the
meeting.
They also can accept or decline association representation.
Or they could request postponing the meeting if, if that's
what was best for the individual.
As the board moves forward to adopt the budget.
We'll be able to then share more clarity.
On adjustments in
positions.
So with that chair, DeAngelis.
Started by saying there was an adjustment to March 16th.
Because of the time that we need for the meet
and consult process to happen with our association leaders.
Out of respect for their time to do their work.
And to schedule those notifications and have the notification conversations.
We will not be able to provide more detail on
the budget until we are through those notifications.
So next March next Monday, March 16th.
We, we would like to be open.
For a conversation with district administration.
It is a lot of information to take in. People
have excellent questions. People have excellent ideas as we come
into dialogue.
And we wanna provide an opportunity for that. The board
is certainly invited to be present, but that would be
hosted by the superintendent with support from his team.
And then on March 23rd.
We would be able to move forward into the budget
detail.
I did wanna note that that meeting is scheduled to
happen at Redbank community center.
Before I open it up for questions here.
I, I just wanna note that the leadership team.
Again, I am here to speak on behalf of 25
people.
We respect the budget constraint of a no more than
6% increase to taxpayers.
Taxpayers, the budget you're looking at tonight is a 3%
or 3.3 increase over FY 26.
Which is the lowest increase that this board would have
moved forward in five years.
We believe that this will support outcomes for students and
allow the district to meet its legal obligations for programming
and supports.
Supports. And again, we believe it will put us on
a path towards financial sustainability, given our negotiated labor contracts
and debt service.
Will continue to face challenges.
Challenges to keep costs below the contract rates.
But this year will be an important step forward.
Finally want to share.
That the leadership team.
And again, they have unanimously supported the recommendation that is
in front of the board.
Tonight, they reviewed these.
Slides and our recommended proposal.
This morning to make sure that we were speaking as
a unified front.
So we are hopeful that the board and stakeholders.
Will understand the level of analysis that's been undertaken by
the team of 25 leaders in the district.
Total that team has more than 500 years.
Of combined experience working in education.
And have expertise in their fields.
We are ready.
And to move forward with kindness.
And care for our community.
Especially those positions.
Positions those people whose positions are eliminated in the transition.
And we respect the budget process.
And know the sooner the board is able to adopt
a budget.
It will allow us to move forward with planning.
And implementation of the needed change.
The slide you have here on slide 34 is the
same one that I opened with.
So that you can see across the cost centers.
What the increases are and what that represents as a
percent change from this year.
With that.
I can either turn it over for questions now, chair
DeAngelis, or come back up.
For questions. It will take questions now, if possible.
There are questions from board members.
To go first.
Member feller. Yeah, I'm happy to start.
Thanks so much to administration for putting this all together.
A lot of work clearly went into this.
I just wanna summarize what we just heard.
We're eliminating a proposed 78 rolls 42 teachers, 16 ed
techs.
Techs 14 service, custodial and transportation staff for bargaining staff
and two administrators.
To those affected. I'm so sorry for the situation. This
all feels very unfair.
And cor encourage the board to provide concrete feedback.
Wherever possible as soon as possible.
Such as this administration can notify impacted individuals. These next
two weeks are gonna be extremely difficult.
We're gonna have to work even harder than we already
have been.
I'm not an educator nor have I ever worked in
south Portland schools.
I do not have a graduate degree in education. I
have Supreme confidence in our administrators to continue guiding this
community through a challenging year in. Wanna let them do
their jobs.
I agree that we need to reestablish the fund balance,
especially given some of the concerns about skills, HVAC system,
which we all know will be a replacement costing more
than $3 million.
Agree, the board should adopt a policy requiring a minimum
fund, balanced commitment for each annual budget.
I'll add another recommendation that we adopt a policy that
provides guidance for guidance, for how the fund balances should
be used.
Fund balances should not be used to cover routine operatings
expenses. As I presume they were used in recent years.
I wanna provide some feedback on the elementary.
Reconfiguration proposal. I feel like I need to articulate these,
excuse me, member fell. Yes. Just the, the, this point
right now is just do, do board members have questions?
Yes. Do you have questions that you wanna ask about
the.
Proposal. Yes I do. Okay. Let's go to your questions.
Okay.
Redrawing the attendance zones of any of the elementary schools
will be a delicate process.
Would it be possible to allow redistricted families to select
which school they would like to attend?
If that is not possible.
Can we grandfather families to attend whichever school, their older
children.
Already attend so that we don't split families across schools.
So, let let, let's see if she can answer that.
Sure.
With, with the current configuration.
Proposed
here.
Families.
Would all experience that redistricting together. So there would not
be the splitting of older and younger children.
In terms of
choice between
schools. It is a delicate.
Balance of capacity of the building.
And certainly wanting wherever possible to.
Preserve connections to the community.
It feels premature to give you a final answer on
that this weekend, I did spend time.
In our transportation bus software, looking at where students actually
live.
And so again, I think that the next piece would
be to dive into that with more detail.
Before I provide a preliminary answer on that. And thankyou.
Thank you very much just as a caution to everybody.
Ju just remember, this is just a proposal.
There has not been a vote or an acceptance.
So, this is just what is presently proposed.
So we, we don't have a sense yet whether board
members.
Feel positively about that or negatively or what? So this
is a time to see if board members have questions
about.
This present proposal.
Do you have more questions? I'm okay for now. Okay.
Thank you. Member Smith.
My main, first question I think is, are you quickly
able to move slides? Could you go to slide four?
You bet.
So I want to highlight that dollar tax increase as
a percentage, the 6% that we were given guidance by
city council.
And just point out to folks that that number is
not fixed. That that was a suggestion by the city
council.
And does not necessarily have to be.
What the end result looks like.
The question that I wanted to ask was, do you
have, I know this number is.
Around. And I have an estimate that I can share,
but I just wanna know if you have a firmer
idea of what that.
Dollar amount looks like for an average home in south
Portland. What that 5.9% increase is? Sure. Gimme one minute.
And I can give you that piece of information.
So the latest information that we had from the city.
Was that
that would represent and I'm gonna.
Turn and look at the finance director in a minute.
And that would be
an anticipated impact of 257.
Dollars for an average.
Home the average home value.
Was at 514,000.
Yes. Great.
So I think I just wanna point out to folks
that.
Another one percentage increase.
In this number is about.
Four to $5 a month for the average home. Mm-hmm
so.
We don't have to stick to the 6%. I'm a
strong proponent that we look at a higher number. I
know folks don't want to talk about higher taxes, but
I think.
Looking at our current state and what this is gonna
do to our school system in the long term.
I, I encourage folks to reach out to their city
councilmen about a proposed increase of this number. And I,
I.
Would ask the board to consider.
Going back to the city council, looking for a higher
number so that we can make some better decisions about
the future of our schools.
Member Richardson.
I support everything that member Smith just said.
I wanna take that just a little bit further.
And ABI, you can check me on this, but Tyler
and I and Claire on the finance committee, and we
talked about what is an 8% increase look like.
Which would be
roughly $340.
For household, which is a enough up for the 500,
you know, at the average 500 K, which is like
an additional Netflix subscription each month.
I realize these are all privileged, like things that I'm
throwing out there.
But these are some pretty catastrophic.
Cuts that we're looking at. I'm a firm believer that
we.
That we start to get creative with city council.
Given, they have a very healthy fund balance right now.
So
encourage you all to, to, to reach out to your
counselors as well. And those points.
My question here is
kind of in light of what we were just talking
about.
So I'm, I'm thinking of.
And I'm getting to a question, but we are in
a very transitionary period as a district.
We have an interim superintendent.
Who is leaving in June. Who's only been here for
a year, so has really just been able to help.
Really support you, Joe, kind of.
Do a lot of things. So.
Our one of our initiatives as the board is to
find a new superintendent.
And we, I, I think if anybody hasn't read the
leadership profile that our.
Search recruiting firm did
really I think gets to the heart of a lot
of our issues.
Issues as a district financial constraints.
Constraints is a really big part of that profile.
So
I'm struggling with really disruptive changes for a community.
That has
no stable leadership.
For lack of not to say you're not a stable
leader, but we don't have.
A superintendent with a vision for our strategic vision, for
our.
Community for our district for the next five years. Right.
So.
I would like to know.
What the proposal looks like if we don't close a
school.
And what I mean, all I've heard is that that
could be aggressive and significant, but I, what I just
saw was aggressive and significant in terms of an IM
of, of cuts. So.
Could we consider
for discussion a proposal.
That is essentially the same.
But does not.
Does not cut a school.
Or close a school.
Understanding that we will need to hand this future superintendent.
All of the really important information we've learned here, which
is that we have an equity.
Issue in our elementary schools.
Students are experiencing very different experiences.
On the east side of town versus the west side
of the town.
And the boundaries and configurations project.
Kicked that off. We have projects that we, as a
board need to resurrect, and then we have all the
information that we've learned recently with these presentations.
And that I believe
it's hard to kind of start hacking at the infrastructure
of our schools.
Knowing that we are going to have a brand new
leader.
In six months who
might have a better night, might have a different or
better vision. I don't know.
But, so I, I guess my question is, is it
a, is it, you know, can you, can you swag
that for us right now? What.
What that looks, what, what our budget would look like.
If we did not close a school.
Knowing that potentially there is an appetite of some of
us on the board to look above 6% of an
increase.
Sure. I, I'm not gonna hazard a guess on numbers.
Right now, but what I can tell you is with
the problem that we have been tackling of $8.4 million.
Across our infrastructure.
43% of that right now.
Rests in the elementary school redesign.
A substantial amount of that comes from the facility savings
of closing one building.
For one year.
No, because we would then be operating four buildings moving
forward.
In terms of the facility savings that you're talking about.
There's there's the one year savings and then there's the
projected five year savings. Sure. Right now I'm talking about
one year savings. Okay. Okay. So with the current current.
Constraints of 6%.
Which is 8.4 million.
I I do firmly believe that this is the best
solution.
To that problem.
It certainly is not the only solution. And if you
were to tell us that one of the variable in
the equation changes.
Changes, we can go back and look for a different
solution.
But having looked at this from every side.
If those variables stay the same.
I'm hard pressed and our team, I think would be
hard pressed to recommend.
Something as better than this.
So again, we are
we are open to new parameters.
I, I balance that with the urgency.
That this room of people represents and the people watching
at home.
Feel to have some answers.
So again, I want to be thoughtful and make sure
that we do our work.
And that we
continue to move with purpose towards a solution. And so
finding that right balance is.
Is challenging. And I like, you want to get it
as right as possible.
But certainly if the board gives us new guidance, we
will go back and do more work.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Questions. Can I, can we come back on another, on
this round? Yeah. Okay. Sure. All right. Thanks. Yeah.
Member Davidson.
Hi, Dr. Prince.
I was wondering if you could modify one of the
proposals and then project that to us, maybe a, a
later date for 1.3. I was wondering what it would
look like with pre-K at the high school.
As a potential solution and then also divvying up the
schools so that we have skill in and brown school
as.
Second grade through fourth grade schools and then either Dyer.
Or Taylor as kindergarten and first grade schools and then
small school as of kindergarten and first grade school.
I I'm wondering what that proposal would look like only
because 1.3.
Did have significant cost savings.
Savings. Yeah. And again, we can continue to model.
Any variables that we get direction on.
I think we left last meeting.
Feel like feeling like there was a strong interest in
the community that the next best step for us was
to keep pre-K through four schools.
And maybe see the transition to.
pre-K through one and two through four schools as.
Two or three years out.
But given the fact that it's March and families need
to plan for this fall.
That, that might be the next best step we could
take. So that was.
Part of our calculations in coming back with this, but
certainly as we leave.
Here tonight. If, if there's consensus.
On
a new direction to take the proposal.
We'll we'll get to work on that.
Thank you. Thank you, member Davidson. Hold on. Do, do
you have questions? I, yeah, I just one other minute
to think that that's okay.
Number gallon. Okay. Member feller. I have a couple questions
about.
Closure and I'm gonna engage.
With options, including closure.
Because our schools are at a 77% operating capacity at
the elementary school we could, we could.
Unfortunately lose in elementary school and still have room for
all students at remaining schools.
So I have three, three questions.
Questions, I'm gonna ask them and get a response. And
then again, first question, won't more students be impacted if
we close dire versus Kaler.
Yes, you are not wrong. That currently more students go
to Dyer than go to Caler.
As I shared, we looked at the facilities costs.
And we also listened to.
The conversation last week, where the board showed a strong
interest in having our bipo students not be as disrupted
again, that's representative in the choice of the proposal that
you have in front of you tonight. And then, and
two follow up questions.
Questions. And I think, I, I think these are both
correct, but.
More students live within walking distance of Dyer compared to
Taylor.
And as you mentioned
I do believe Kayla has more low income students compared
to Dyer. I'm just trying to get my facts straight
on these schools.
I wanna double check the walking distance one.
The socioeconomic I can confirm.
Great. Thank you.
Thank you. Sorry. Gimme one second. To double check the
walking distance here.
So
Kayla right now.
Has 67%. And actually, let me bring this up for
you.
This is available.
In the slide deck that's embedded on the webpage.
So
what you're looking at here is students within the walk
zone, and then who's a registered Walker.
So currently right now,
at Dyer school, this is January data. Excuse me.
61 students.
Were registered as walkers for 56 of the popul, 56%
of the population.
And at Kahler that was 59 students switched for their
population.
Was 67%. So a according to this analysis,
that our director of operations and safety pulled.
Kayla actually has more registered.
Walkers than Dyer.
That's very nuanced. Thank you. But that, that's a great
number, but.
thank you. Other comments, questions.
Questions member rich.
I would just like to share I've I've talked to
a number of constituents since I.
Was in the last meeting and I think there's a
strong.
Support for
cuts instead of closures.
Closures. Unfortunately, I didn't realize that we had to do
notifications so soon.
So it still feels rushed. Mm-hmm .
But I understand the contractual.
Obligations. So that's really my only comment. I, I just
had a, a lot of feedback from people.
Who think that we're rushing reconfiguration, we're rushing closing schools.
Thank you.
Other may I
respond to that because I do think it's important to
note.
With the current variables.
Variables. There's not a model that doesn't have this level
of cuts. Right? Mm-hmm whether it's done through reconfiguration.
Reductions across the board.
Correct again.
The models. If we keep five schools open.
I would, these numbers will go up, right? Because we
don't have facility savings. So again, I think I heard
you saying.
That you wanted to model.
Reductions.
So are you asking for a proposal that has another
million in staff reductions? Because that's the offset to the
facility. That's my ask. Okay. But I'm not sure about
the wider board and I say it, it supports some
of my constituents concerns. They're worried about the speed at
which we're moving with reconfiguration.
And closures mm-hmm .
But maybe, you know, those are the squeaky wheels. I
don't know.
I haven't heard many people on the other side of
that.
But it's something to consider board members.
Thank you.
Member Davidson. I just had a question for you.
On policy, I guess, am I able to make a
statement as of right now? And if not, will I
have time later to do so?
Yeah, right right now. I'm just trying to see if
there are questions. Okay. Yeah. And then we'll come back
again.
Member Holman.
So do you
see this, this
the plan that you've shown with closing Dyer.
Do you see this as a long-term?
Solution. Does this mean that reconfiguration in your mind is.
Something that was that's off the table.
Or, I mean, cuz although.
On slide 21. It's.
Noted that, that there was interest in keeping schools pre-K
to four. I think there was also interest in reconfiguration,
not to say that. I mean, I, I didn't keep
it clear tab, I mean, in, in terms of the
board, but anyway,
I just wondered what the thought, what the thinking is
around that. Sure. And I think.
The, the team spoke to you last night that we
believe programmatically.
There are real benefits to reconfiguring.
Grade bands and
we heard concerns about the pace.
So, what we've brought back to you is what we
think the next best step is.
Which is to move to four buildings.
Buildings, which is a, a more efficient operation for us.
On the path towards
towards evaluating reconfiguration.
Rather than trying to take both steps at once.
Again, I think some board members.
And some members of the public spoke to kind of
phased implementation.
And so what we've brought back to you tonight is
to, to be respectful of that.
Request, but I think we all continue to stand by
the fact that.
There are real positives that could happen for kids.
And for the district with.
New configurations, but understand that that might be two or
three years out. So.
Can I just follow up please. So I found it
in, we've received a lot of mail and I'm trying
to respond to everybody. I wanna say it's hard because
it's a ton and I do have a full-time job,
but, and anyway, but.
There have been some interesting emails coming in recently talking
about reconfiguration and some of them have been from educators.
And I found that particularly interesting.
That's all I'm saying about that. I'm not staking out
a really hardcore position or anything here. I'm still thinking,
but, but I found that of interest.
Mm-hmm
thank you remember Holman member Dowling. Thank you.
Board member Holman said something that then.
Made an idea, pop into my head and, and helped
me form a question.
Which is if we close.
An elementary school, regardless of which elementary school that might
be.
Would that look like
a permanent closure where
that property then gets handed back to the city todo.
What they choose to do with it? Or would it
be more of a.
Kind of
going into hibernation mode where you're, you're keeping it heated
just enough. So the pipes don't freeze, but you're not.
You know, you're not operating it as a school. And
so therefore your facilities.
Cost for that building go way, way, way down. Andthen.
That could potentially be spun up again at some point
in the future. If we had.
An enrollment boom for
any number of reasons.
Reasons. Sure. It's a great question. And later this week,
the superintendent, myself, director of operations, director of finance.
Chair Dean. We are meeting with the mayor.
And city counselor and the city manager.
To really talk through the facilities.
Side of this. We have the deed to the dire
property to, to review, but we need to better understand.
Exactly what would happen at transaction, if that's the way
the board goes. So I anticipate we'll be able to
give you.
More updates.
Once we've had that meeting.
On exactly what, what the options are for sort of,
whether you, I, I like that term hibernation or, you
know,
closure and sale. So we'll be able to report back
on that.
Okay, thank you. Thank you, member Smith. And then member
feller. Well,
I was just, I wanna ask a quick question to
you chair. Is there gonna be time for more discussion
on this? Cuz I have only comments left. I don't
have any questions.
Questions. Yes, let's do questions right now. And we'll come
back around for comments. Great. Yes.
Member Calla. As, as I think about the closure of
the school, everybody obviously feels like that's a loss to
the community. And I just wonder.
Could there be a scenario where the community actually gains
something, right? Like.
Childcare is really hard to come by in south Portland.
It's really expensive.
We have a relationship with Chicky.
To what extent could one of these schools.
Become a childcare center. Have, have we investigated that at
all?
Again, I think that comes on the far side of
our conversations of understanding with the city.
What happens. I also think as we consider.
Dire as a potential property and it's walking proximity to
the community center. I think that's another consideration in terms
of.
Is it expanded programming for rec or something like that.
But again, I think we'll be able to better answer.
What are those potentials after we know.
Sort of the exact rules we have.
Member Richardson.
I have like kind of a, a hodgepodge of questions.
Questions.
Can you go to wherever we, wherever the cost center
breakdown is of the like,
percentage of like the, the decrease.
Yeah.
Okay.
Something that we've asked that I, that isn't clear to
me.
Tonight is what is the student?
To staff ratio, given the reductions.
Because we know we had like a really cushy, nice
one.
Right. Four to one or something.
Yes, that's about right. So, so.
Then I, and then I see negative.
A negative on student and staff support. And I'm.
I'm I get a little uncomfortable with that. I mean,
so, what does that, what does that mean? And.
Is that, can you, and then can you give us.
What the projected student to staff ratio is. And ideally.
And we, we have asked for this before. I'm not
sure we've ever seen it.
I'm talking. I wanna see the student to, to direct
facing.
Role, you know, student facing roles.
Ratio if possible.
Sure.
Two things. The majority of our.
Teaching positions are in cost center.
One and two cost center. One is regular education.
pre-K through 12 cost center. Two is special education.
pre-K through 12.
As well you'll notice that student and staff support.
Overall is, is just over 5 million this year versus 28 million
in cost center. One.
So keeping in mind, there is a reduction there.
But the reductions relative to the size of the cost
center. So.
So again,
that is not actually where the majority of.
The teaching reductions.
What are those roles like who is in cost center?
Five.
That has to do with some of our.
Support staff and also
we have been going through all of our non personnel.
So that is where like technology reductions.
Okay. In terms of not personnel, but in terms of
like invested software,
and not purchasing more devices.
Devices that's where some of those live.
Again, I wanna be really.
Thoughtful about not getting ahead of notification of staff, but
we certainly can bring you a better breakdown.
That's okay. I mean, I think.
I guess
I guess my concern is, is.
You know, the, the, and it so long. Is it,
is it the staff?
What was that the staff or is that, was that
a cost center for.
Staff that is potentially responsible for helping our most ATRI,
like, like, like a specialist role. Like I, but I
guess our specialists in cost center one.
Correct. I would say
95% of our teaching and ed tech roles are between
cost centers, one and two.
That's not to say there aren't other.
Positions. Okay.
And then, and then question about the, yeah. Yep. We,
we don't have that number, but happy to generate that
for you.
I think
in terms of drawing the line.
Around, what's a student facing role and what's not.
That feels more challenging.
E every one of the positions in the district exists
to support students.
Students. So for instance, a nurse is within our teaching
association.
But they're not in front of a classroom.
Would that be considered a student facing role?
A specialist or a, B, C, B a, a behavior.
Specialist. They often are in consultation with teachers.
Teachers we count that or not again, I think you
know that that's a tricky, like I know, I know
that's tricky, I guess. Can you at least give us
the figure?
Can you at least first give us the figure.
That's shows an increase against the one. Sure. Abso absolutely.
I think drawing that other boundary is just a little
more challenging. Yeah. I mean, I've been asking, I've been
asking for that.
For you. I know, I know the public has asked
for that. I've asked for that be before I was
on the board. I know that's hard to define. I
would welcome.
Like educator support in helping to define that. Cause I
think that's a.
I, I think that that's a really.
I don't know. Is it, is it the teacher's union?
Is it the ed tech union? Is it just those,
those units? I don't know. I don't wanna exclude anybody.
But, you know,
anyway. Okay. Cost center 11 has a really large increases
that because of the nutrition budget finally going there. Yes.
Okay.
Finally figured out something on this and then.
When do you ha when do we have to give
notice under the contract? So per.
Pers. So statute governs when we have to give notification
to principals.
And to teacher contracts and it's 90 days prior.
To the contract ending.
So the, the legal
notification that a position has been eliminated.
Has to be 90 days prior, or the district pays
a penalty.
If it goes beyond that.
Our moral obligation is to let people know as soon
as possible.
Such that these amazing educators.
Educators can begin to look and land on their feet
in places and we can help them do so. So
again, that is our hope is to do it.
As soon as possible knowing full well that we still
have to go through a process and change can occur.
So, but the that's our legal mandate. And then I
think we all just feel a sense of a.
A moral obligation to let people know as soon as
possible.
And to not be discussing change.
That someone doesn't know.
Personally
as well, so, okay. Thank you. And that, it sounds
like.
That notice kind of similar to last year, which I'm
just confused by how that, and, and, and maybe this
is how it works in other districts, but.
The notice is essentially given before the board has approved
a budget.
So then notice is given.
And then there's potentially changes to that.
Cuz the, so is that how that is? Does that
just how it works? Okay.
It, it is an
unfortunate that that is the way that our process works.
So they are told now that it is a.
A a potential
outcome of the current proposal includes a reduction of the
position that they're in and then they do get official
notice.
Following city council's adoption of the budget.
That's when the official notification goes out, that the position
has been.
Eliminated, but there, there is, unfortunately.
A long time. That is.
Uncertain. Yep.
Can we go to, thank you. Can we please go
to the, the, the breakdown of what the elementary classrooms
look like at the.
Four schools. And, and before we go to that member
Richardson, just for clarification.
Dr. Prince, the
contract year is September one to August 31st. Correct? For.
For teachers that's correct for.
Administrators it's July one. Okay. To June 30th. Okay. And ed
techs.
Techs ed techs are also a nine one start date.
Okay. Do I just wanted people to understand where that
90 days.
Legally, we don't wanna wait until that, but we're.
But it's not technically until May 31st. Thank you. I was,
I actually thought it was June 30th, so I was clarifying.
So that's why I was trying to clarify. Yes. Yep.
I was like, wow, we're really kind close. Okay. Yeah.
And then the yes.
So
my kids go to brown. I know that they're a
class. There are three.
There are grades with three classrooms, right?
So, I guess what I'm worried about here is.
You know, understanding, we were thinking about we've on we've
we've we talked about a closure in the middle of
the city mm-hmm and we talked and we know.
What
we know that skill and is very full.
And so are any
ignoring which school we're gonna close under, assuming that it
wouldn't be skill in.
Are we go, are we potentially districting kids to skilling
to make those classrooms larger?
Or is there a way.
Like, or is, is this like an equal dis, like,
how are you thinking about, cause I've just been assuming
we wouldn't.
Wouldn't make, make those classrooms bigger.
At at skill. And because we know they're the bigger
classrooms mm-hmm no, this will make every classroom.
Larger, including skill who and killer who know is already.
Skill and does not currently have this largest class sizes.
It has the largest student body. Right. But it doesn't
have the largest class sizes. Sorry. Which were you talking
about? Well, but we also know that they're, that they,
I think have the highest, I mean, we still don't
know the academic outcomes of the elementary schools, which is
something I asked for.
Last time. So, you know, it's.
It's it's really hard. I think it's really understanding that
we're trying to make a financial decision. We also have
these kind of equity.
Arguments in the background. I just don't wanna make a
situation potentially worse.
From an equity decision.
So, how do we
I don't know. I mean, again, I'm not the expert,
but that's my I I'm. And, and we received an
email kind of fr from a teacher, which thank you
for expressing the reality of what's some of these proposals
mean because I, I don't know what they mean, but
it's sounds like that.
That potentially tips the scales in a way that's.
That's that's gonna, you know, potentially.
Make educational outcomes, even harder for our kids.
And I appreciate your comments. I'm not sure the question
you want me to respond to. I, this is, I,
I mean, as a board, I think we need to,
I think, I don't know. I think as I think
we need to understand the allocation of where this students
are gonna go.
So that we don't make the equity issues we know
about.
Worse. So I don't, and I I'd, I'd love to
hear some thoughts from.
From from this board about, about what are those characteristics?
Characteristics that, that, that we wanna give you as guidance.
To
you know, I, I mean, in my mind, I've always
thought, you know, cuz in my mind I thought we
would just be adding.
Students to, if it's Kayla or Dyer that close it's
one of those schools, plus brown or small.
And again, if you hot scale. Sure. If you look
at how the district.
Is drawn. There is one neighborhood that currently attends Calor
that is geographically closer to Skillman. So again, those are
the places at the margins that we're going to have
to explore, to try and.
Use our physical footprint.
Most efficiently.
So again, happy to work on bringing you.
Back more of that detailed data, but we don't have
it for you tonight. Yeah. So can we, I guess,
give you guidance about.
Not ex not making the, the socioeconomic.
Disparity and bipo disparity.
Larger with the redistricting, because then I think we're just
perpetuating some of the issues that.
We were told we wanna be, be dealing with and
we wanna be addressing with and reconfiguration.
Correct. And that is why we proposed reconfiguration that this
direction does not bring us towards that goal.
In our next step, because it's still.
Divides us on an east west. I understand spectrum, but
can we talk about that as a board?
That maybe. And I don't know if it's consulting with
this specific, I don't know what neighborhood you're talking about.
If, if, if, if it's talking to that neighborhood and
saying,
we wanna give you the choice and we, you know,
do you wanna go to this? I don't know. Like
I just, I just sure. It's, it's, it's a issue
that we, and I don't wanna, I wanna figure out
how to.
Create the less, I think less impact is better.
Than the full reconfiguration. I firmly believe that, but I
don't wanna perpetuate a problem that we already know is
problem.
And unfortunately there's not a solution that does both.
So we either have reconfiguration that's more disruptive.
Or we take the next best step.
And try and move ourselves in that direction on a
longer horizon. I very much appreciate the point of we
wanna, we wanna do it in the best possible way.
And certainly open to hearing the board's feedback on what
considerations.
But across the board, this.
Takes the same number of students and puts them in
fewer class set classrooms, which grows the number of, of
students in the classrooms. Okay. I have one other question.
Sure. Yes. What have, what if we had closed? If,
if let's say Taylor.
Does close. Sure.
What happens to that title funding, you know, because we've,
I've always thought Kayla and Skiller and our title in
schools. Sure. It's, it's a great question. And thanks for
asking it. I consulted with our, we have loud liaison
at the department of education, and I said, we're in
the, this process right now.
How's that going to impact us?
And what she said is it is not uncommon for
schools to have to grapple with this.
And we can have a year where we.
Fall back on our prior.
Figures while we're in the process.
And then we would go through a new application.
For to move forward with. So we would not.
Lose funding from her. We would sort of be in
a.
Kind of a held harmless for a year where we
would have the funding.
While we then were able to look at the distribution,
but I, I did check in with DOE to make
sure that we weren't.
Weren't jeopardizing funding.
In any of these models, be it skill and or
killer.
Thanks.
I mean you and I could talk all day, but
I'll, I'll shut up now. Member rich. what are
these numbers mean?
This, this, this is the number of classrooms. So there'd
be two pre-K classrooms at Calor. Okay. Two kindergarten classrooms,
two grade one. Okay. And at skill in, there'd be
four kindergarten classrooms. Okay. Thank you. Yep.
There's no units. Any other questions?
Questions member Holman. Just a quick question. So am I,
am I right? That at this time,
Kayla and Gillan have somewhat smaller class sizes by intent,
correct? To help with somewhat higher demands of some of
the pop their population. Is that correct? Okay. That is
correct.
Thank you and sorry, in our elementary maximum.
You know, we have, we have maximums that are already
set and I know I should probably have memorized these.
I am sorry.
I did not. It is okay.
Those are listed up here in this slide deck.
For pre-K it's 16 is the cap.
K one and two is our guidance. And then three
and four move up to 24 students.
Students and that's not changing.
That is board policy. I have not had any signal
that that's a desired.
Desired action for the board.
And just to clarify
member Holman's question. How many classrooms do we have? Who
are at where, where they're at this maximum?
Too currently in this school year. Correct.
I wanna say it's under a total of five.
Classrooms that would be at this max.
Looking at my principal.
We can get, we can get you that number, but
it's it's, it is very few in the current model.
Okay. That, that's what I thought. I just wanted to
be sure we clarified that.
Other questions.
Questions. Sorry. One more. Just, just cuz it was from
Claire. Just what, what, so what does happen to the.
To the extra support that the board.
Approved for skill and Kayla.
Under this under the project. Does that just go away?
It, it would under this model. Yes.
In, in order to meet the, the fiscal constraints.
Constraints. And, and do we have that? What I, what
was that model? Like? What was that again? What it
was what's the before and after.
Like in terms of
you know, what, what was the sup you know, is
it five to one? And then we're now moving to
seven to one or three to one, you know? Sure.
I can bring that back to you. I don't, I
don't feel comfortable doing it off the top of my
head.
Any other questions?
Questions member rich.
On slide 21, you say the less we spent on
facilities, the more we can spend on staffing. Is it
that fluid?
You can just move dollars from roofing to staffing.
So
once we are in a fiscal year, the answer is.
No, in order to move across cost center line.
It takes board action. But as we construct the budget,
if we construct it in a way that's representative of.
More money in cost center nine, which is facilities.
And fewer dollars in
cost center one, which is personnel.
Then that's the rules we're held to in the following
year. It is possible mid-year to move across cost center,
but it does take board vote.
Okay, thank you.
Other questions.
Questions. If there are no other questions I'd like to
go back to the superintendent's report. This is if there's
no objection, go back to the superintendent's report and then
go to the first public comment.
And after the first public comment, come back for board
comment.
Is that, is that okay with everybody? Okay, great. Thank
you. And thank you, Dr. Prince.
So Dr. We'll switch back to your.
Laptop here.
So Dr. Aunt whistle, I believe we're at resignations and
retirements.
I believe that you're right.
Let's see here.
So the, the other piece that we didn't, who didn't
do is.
Enrollment, let me, let me just do that real quick.
Yep. And, and I can see people moving.
To the side here, which is fine. If people are
planning to speak and they want to get themselves lined
up.
You can come over here because when Dr. Aunt whistle
finishes, we will go to.
Public comment, first public comment. So you can get yourself.
Ready. Okay. There you go back to you.
Okay. So there's the, there's the graph in terms of
enrollment, there's been an.
An increase 2007 54.
Is the, the most current.
Enrollment, I just slip back.
Here to the overview of the report.
And just
speak to the two.
Resignations Abigail.
Mendel mingle.
Special educator brown.
Sherry Beland
special educator.
pre-K teacher in Dyer.
And retirements.
Include
Cheryl Kernan Kein Kean, Kirin.
Huron. Thank you. Office manager at the high school.
So we can go to.
Thank you. So we are now.
At public comment.
The first section and I'm just going to read.
Public comment is an opportunity for the board to listen
to.
Opinions of the public that relate to school and education
matters.
On or off this evening's agenda. The board is here
to listen.
Anyone wishing to speak will be asked to proceed to
the microphone and just state your name and the city
where you reside.
All questions will be recorded by the superintendent and will
be answered at the end of the public comment to
the extent possible.
If answers are not available, someone will be assigned to
reply to you. As soon as the answer is available.
You'll be given three minutes to speak.
There will be no interaction between the public and board
members.
Additionally, no clapping, booing, or other disruptive.
Behavior will be allowed.
As a reminder school board meetings are broadcasts.
Live recorded.
And posted on the city's website. So please.
Consider the impact of your comments.
Comments and you may begin.
Ms. Gay.
Thank you very much. Good evening. My name is Sarah
Gabe. I'm president of the south Portland teachers association.
Teacher parent taxpayer.
The works. So I I'm happy to reiterate the call
for courtesy and for productive dialogue.
I I fully
fully appreciate the need to keep things moving this evening.
I know we have a lot of folks with a
lot to say.
And on behalf of my unit, we'll share.
Appreciation for that policy to ensure that we can give
everyone their chance to be heard before we are all
too tired.
My officers and I very wholeheartedly agree with board members
Smith and Richardson's call for the school board to return
to the city council to request more funding.
And for community members to reach out to all of
our elected representatives. This is a great time to get
to know these great people who represent us to insist
on funding that will sustain our core mission and operations.
Please do that.
I think we have over the last week, some of
the biggest concerns that have been shared with me.
Have to do with pace.
Urgency and transparency.
There is what feels like an enormous sense of urgency.
Which as there should be, but that urgency seems to
be fanned a bit through curated data.
I would like to request again, public release of the
rubric that was determined to present the matrix scores, which.
Whether they were intended as such or not were presented
to us as significant data and representative of significant dialogue,
research and consideration.
We would like to see the matrix scores we would
like to understand.
The intention behind that data.
Collection and how it is used to help us understand
why the plans being proposed are the ones that are
in fact best for our community.
With respect to chair DeAngelis. I do not feel that
the information about our superintendent interview committee makeup or the
ongoing process has been particularly clear or accessible.
I think it is troubling when.
My extremely research, happy, overly informed team and many building
administrators, miss a piece of information. That means it was
really hard to find.
Or that it was not shared in a way that
was really conducive to people actually being able to latch
onto that information. And that's a pretty key detail.
I would also like to note for anyone who may
not know that the leadership profiles yield created is posted.
On the city's website or I'm sorry, on the school
department's website.
That is all I would like for us to also
hopefully receive a more thorough update on the status of
this process.
Including anything that at this point may need to be
recapped that may have been shared.
In a live meeting or embedded in a slideshow that
is not necessarily accessible to all today.
Thinking of, we have a lot of concerns about the.
The pace at which these decisions are being made without
greater disclosure. I know we're going to hear a lot
more about that from the fine folks behind me.
But I question to the board, are we really prepared
to share notifications with staff? Are we, as confident as
we need to be that the information we share with
people about their futures professionally and personally are in fact
the right new to be shared.
We are eager for our next meeting and next conversation.
That's three minutes. Thank you. And hope that we can
continue to be a collaborative part of that process. I'm
done. Thank you.
Hi there. Abby Anderson. I'm one of the S P
T a vice presidents.
Presidents. So prior to getting new information from the city
council, I would caution the board against a higher percent
increase than what's currently proposed. Unless we have a.
Very concrete plan for what happens if the budget gets
voted down in June.
The average south Portland voter probably does not know that
a 6% tax increase is about four or $5 per
month, as noted earlier.
If they see a higher number on the ballot compared
to previous years that won't work in the district's favor.
And to that end, if the budget is voted down,
we won't know why. We won't know if it's because
of a tax increase that was too high or because
of a disagreement with the actual.
Proposed plan, like not wanting to close an elementary school.
Regardless teachers and administrators and the board will be doing
this work in July and August, while in the midst
of a big leadership transition with the new superintendent.
And during the summer staff will be doing this year's
budget work instead of focusing on how to handle the
changes.
Changes that this current budget proposal will create going into
FY 27.
The city council gave us a number because we asked
them for one.
So I think we need to respect that or else
we're running the risk of creating more work for us
on an even tougher timeline.
And I greatly appreciate the board's willingness to support educators
and students, but we do need to stabilize our district.
And what that looks like going into next year is
some pretty difficult.
Change, but it will hopefully put us on the road
to a more sustainable long-term plan.
Educators across the district will be here ready to support
students in the fall, but we desperately need time to
handle those changes that we're talking about here.
So if the budget doesn't pass, we'll be scrambling and
it will likely lead to many last minute logistical challenges
in every building. And that's a huge drain on staff,
morale and capacity.
I also echo the concern brought by the community and
the school board that this process is going very quickly.
There is a lot of information to digest in a
fast timeline, but this is the reality of our situation
right now.
And the feeling that some community members have regarding the
speed of this process will only be exacerbated. If the
budget is not passed in June.
If voted down, we may have to cut.
Millions more from our budget and that would be catastrophic.
We have many hard deadlines that are coming up like
notifications to impacted staff and the June referendum itself. So
we need to work with what we have.
And I hope we can continue to improve three seconds
Abby, on this budget process and start communicating with the
public earlier next year.
And we've made some significant improvements in that process since
last year, but there's absolutely more work to do there.
What I hope for this year is for the board
to understand that we need to put forward a proposal
to the city council and to the voters that is
most likely to pass.
Thank you. Thank you, Abby.
Good evening. My name is Lynn McEwen. My son is
a student at small school and I work at brown
school.
I come to you tonight wearing several hats as an
educator, a parent, and a taxpayer, but the perspective that
most shapes how I see these decisions is my experience
as a teacher.
As a teacher, your perspective widens.
Widens you care deeply and become invested in all children.
Students come to us with many different lived.
Experiences strengths and needs.
Every day, we look at the students in front of
us and we balance.
We react, love, teach.
Nurture and give
and they grow. Here's what I know.
There is an achievement gap that exists between low income
and high income students. I know this because I have
studied it extensively and more importantly, I have lived it
through my teaching in multiple schools across our country.
We also know that systemic racism has created a correlation
between socioeconomic status and race that cannot be ignored.
Ignored research tells us that integrated schools improve outcomes for
all students, regardless of race, income, or background.
Our community here in south Portland has blossomed over the
years.
And now includes people born and raised in Maine.
Families who have moved here from across the country.
And many who have come from around the world.
I feel very fortunate to live here.
Working in SP S D. And my role as math
specialist, I can tell you again, that the achievement gap
is real and it exists here.
Three years ago, I became the mass specialist at brown
school.
Brown is the elementary school that most closely mirrors mirrors,
the socioeconomic racial and ethnic makeup of south Portland.
Every day, I get to witness students from vastly different
lived experiences.
Coming together and learning from one another.
Right now we are facing a difficult financial reality.
My fear is if we do not consolidate in some
way, whether through reconfiguration.
Closing a school or combination of the two.
We will have to cut so many services that support
students.
Students, those losses will be felt most directly in classrooms.
As teachers will scramble to be all things to all
students more than they already do.
Some things that I want to remind everyone is that
as a district, we have navigated major transitions before.
When Mahoney and Memorial closed those students and all fifth
graders transitioned to the new middle school.
30 seconds. Lynn transportation is another concern that many people
have raised. The average bus ride in the United States is
between 21 and 35 minutes.
Our city is only 14 square miles.
It seems possible to design roots that minimize time on
buses.
Buses. I also believe that equity and bus rides and
walking can be thought of with our entire K-12.
Experience in mine, not just at the elementary level.
My friend is gonna yield some time. Do you wanna
that's three minutes. Okay. .
Hi. Hi, my name's Colleen Parvin. I'd like to yield
my time to my colleague Lynn McEwen. Hi.
Colleague and we're friends and colleagues and colleagues. Okay.
Sorry, I can't help myself.
So my biggest takeaway from this process is this.
If we are going to face difficult change, we should
try to use that moment to strengthen our system for
all students.
Students, I am open to any option that moves our
elementary schools toward reflecting the demographics of our city.
Minimizes cuts to support services for students and progresses us
in closing the achievement gap here.
My biggest worry is that we will close a school.
Redistribute those students without making any significant change to the
EQ.
EQ equity of the schools that remain and the achievement
gap will remain.
And then what happens to our schools?
With the lowest income students.
Students, I assume they will have larger class sizes and
less support services.
Services where educators there will remain overwhelmed.
And achievement will continue to be lower than the other
schools across the district.
That would be a greater injustice for our community than
not getting to walk our kids to school.
No matter what decision is made. These are incredibly hard
choices.
One thing I know for certain is that we are
going to lose many talented educators through this process.
And many of us teachers are grieving that right now.
The only thing giving me hope right now.
Is that throughout my career in education, I have seen
firsthand the extraordinary love and commitment educators bring to their
students.
Students. I believe that even through difficult change the education,
the educators in this district will continue to show up
for kids.
And rebuild strong school communities.
Tonight. I ask that we keep our focus on the
long-term future of our students.
Students, the choices you make now will shape the experiences
and opportunities available to children across this city for years
to come.
My hope is that whatever path you choose.
It moves us closer to schools that are balanced.
Balanced supportive and truly reflective of the south Portland community.
Thank you.
Good evening.
My name is Daphne Damers on Emma K2, special education
teacher at brown elementary. Can you move the, your, your
voice right. Is that better?
Maybe. Okay. I wanna begin by acknowledging one aspect of
the district's current planning that I believe.
Has real potential to benefit students.
Students, the proposed pre-K to four configuration.
For many students, particularly students with disabilities.
Reducing the number of school transitions can be incredibly meaningful.
Fewer transitions.
Can mean greater stability.
Stronger relationships with staff.
And more consistent support over time.
Continuity matters deeply.
For our most vulnerable learners.
Learners the same principle of continuity also applies to the
adults.
Who support students every day.
In specialized classrooms.
Classrooms like mine staff members who work with students are
not interchangeable.
Educational technicians develop deep knowledge of E each child's communication
style.
Behavioral needs and learning strategies.
In my classroom, my ed techs, Lauren and Eden.
Have become highly trained members of our team and valued
members of the brown school community.
Under my supervision, they help implement specially designed instruction.
Provide behavioral support.
And support therapeutic.
So support therapeutic.
Sorry.
Interventions for my students, which my students rely on.
For students with complex needs, trusted relationships with familiar adults
are not just helpful.
They're essential to their ability to regulate.
Engage and, and learn.
When those relationships are disrupted.
The effects are felt immediately in the classroom.
As the district moves through staffing decisions.
Decisions and potential reductions in force.
I urge you to consider the impact those decisions have
on specialized programs.
Programs and the students that they serve.
Continuity of care is not simply a preference.
It's a key component of effective, special education.
I would also ask that as these difficult decision seconds,
30 are made staff members receive clear.
Timely and dignified communication.
The educators and support staff in our district care deeply
about students and deserve to be treated with respect and
transparency during times of uncertainty.
Our students deserve stability.
They deserve teams who know them.
And understand them and PR and can provide consistent support.
Thank you for your time and commitment to our students
and staff.
Thank you three minutes.
Good evening board members. I'm Mitch Willette. I'm one of
the assistant principals of the middle school. I've been an
administrator in south Portland for 10 years.
I'm also a resident. My students go to my, my
children. go to Dyer school. .
Sometimes it feels like students at home, but that's a
different conversation.
I do wanna sincerely apologize to Dr. Prince and Dr.
Entwistle when we were briefed on these slides this morning.
7 45 when students and staff are coming in the building.
Is not easy to be in a virtual meeting and
I must not have been.
Participating a hundred percent because I did miss, you know,
I heard unanimously.
Approved by leadership.
I can say professionally and personally.
I do not support the closing of dire school. If
we are to move to close a school. I don't
think that is the one for, for a few options
for a few reasons, rather.
We're talking about 1.3. So the obvious choice then if
not Dier would be Kaler.
Although we are in dire school. My oldest went to
pre-K at Caler. So I have a little bit of
firsthand familiarity with that.
Being at the end of a dead end road, the
accessibility to get in and out of Calor.
The rare times that I was able to pick up
at 1 45 when pre-K would.
Would get out just with that few amount of cars
in and out was.
A struggle. And I'm sure now that officer Navarro is
gone, I can say that I was parking illegally, probably
most of the time.
I am also, I know board chair mentioned last time
about Taylor's school and water.
Quality it's, it's an air quality issue that the city
has taken with those tanks.
Tanks and I'm sure all of you have seen the,
the council workshop in October where the scientists were reporting
on three years of air quality.
Readings, unfortunately, that that report won't be out till the
summer or this fall.
But there were significant concerns about the prolonged exposure to.
Chemical, you know, there's a certain level.
And the readings were higher than that level, which means
there could be long-term health, risk, risks, or issues with
being exposed to that.
Lastly.
When we're talking about, if we're closing a school, I
would feel one in the smack middle of the.
City would be easiest then to disperse those other kids.
Without adding more students to skilling as, as you just
said,
so I, I do wanna make sure that I go.
Firmly on record because I just wanna be represented accurately.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Good evening board members.
And south Portland school district leadership.
My name is Simone Michel. I live in south Portland.
And I am the parent of a current south Portland,
first grader, and soon to be kindergartner.
I followed last week's budget workshop closely.
It is clear. We are all striving for the same
goal.
Closing a 7 million budget gap while increasing equitable access.
To resources and supports for all.
South Portland, children and families.
Minimizing teacher and staff job loss.
And aiming for a reasonable tax increase percentage.
To the south Portland school district leadership. I appreciate the
work you have done to incorporate community feedback within a
very tight timeline.
We are still facing the devastating.
Reality of a school closure and the loss of over.
70 staff members.
Members a cut of this magnitude. Isn't just a budget
adjustment.
It will have a direct impact on our students' daily
learning and the professional livelihoods on the incredible educators in
our classroom and the staff who support our schools.
We cannot overlook the long-term educational and economic.
Incivility, these cuts will create for south Portland.
I understand that difficult decisions need to be made. However,
I want to ensure that we are exploring, excuse me.
Alternative sources of funding before making a final decision.
I am here tonight to ask a very practical question.
Regarding the city's broader fiscal.
Landscape.
Is there capacity within the CI city council budget to
reallocate funds to the south Portland school district to help
bridge this year's gap.
And how can the public best advocate for and participate
in those specific discussions?
I acknowledge that a one-time allocation is not a long-term
fix.
However it buys this community the most valuable resource we
currently lack.
Time time to engage in a research-based data-driven process that
ensures the long-term health of our schools.
Time to ensure that when we do make structural adjustments,
they are being implemented with the precision and care. Our
students.
Students families and staff deserve.
I appreciate each of you for engaging in the complex
circumstances we are being faced with. And for the time
that you have dedicated.
30 seconds towards working a better working towards a better
solution for the entire community.
I will follow up about this question with an email
to the board and city council as well. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Simone.
Simone. Thank you. Chair and board members. My name is
Lizzie Moke and I'm the mom of three kids age
eight, seven, and four.
My family moved to south Portland in 2022 from new
Orleans.
And we chose south Portland because we valued the community's
strong sense of connection and its diversity across culture, background,
and income values that we want our children to grow
up with.
In addition to my mom job, I've worked in healthcare
for over 20 years. I've held pretty every, every clinical
role all the way up. And now I work in
system leadership and I've been impressed with the process of
actually how similar.
Decisions in education are to healthcare. We face similar rising
costs, similar workforce sustainability issues, and similar unpredictable population needs
that we have to respond to.
My comments tonight are really to you.
I have not been a Dr. Prince's position or Dr.
Entwistle.
Tussles, but I have presented to many boards and committees
along my career.
I would ask you to establish your own clarity.
In the central problem again, just like last meeting.
There are many problems that continue to come up and
be voiced.
Voiced, ultimately the budget is, is the primary problem.
I was very impressed by the administration's presentation tonight.
After last week, my, my comment was gonna be mostly
about asking for more data.
There was a lot of data tonight. It was thoughtful.
It was data driven and it was informed.
I spent a lot of my own time, this weekend
looking at data as well, and particularly around academic outcomes.
Outcomes like many who voice tonight, there are concerns about
the unintended impact that we may have if we don't
truly understand our data.
There are concerns around school transitions and mobility about diluting,
specialized support.
About destabilizing our, our communities with bus routes, which could
increase absenteeism.
And ultimately I think for the board per, perhaps each
individual or the board as a whole, there needs to
be an establishment of guiding principles for decision making.
There were many questions tonight and they felt really broad.
It felt too broad, given all the data that's been
presented. And I know all of the conversations and hard
work that have been had.
So my question is how will you make this decision
and what principles will guide it? How will you use
data to keep the process objective and fair?
If it were me, I would focus on five domains.
Domains outcomes, access, stability, equity, and financial feasibility.
Student outcomes need to be prioritized.
Access and transportation matter.
Stability matters for students and it really matters for staff.
Equity and belonging, and that concept of unintended impact needs
to be protected.
And finally second left. Everything needs to be financially feasible.
So to close.
My recommendation will be each of you defining the problem
clearly and transparently.
Ground decisions and baseline data and think about unattended impact.
And then finally established principles and a scoring framework to
ground your decisions so that you can make decisions an
fair objective, objective and explainable way.
Thank you for all the time and energy you're putting
into this difficult work. I can only imagine how heavy
this feels.
Thank you. Thank you.
Good evening. My name is Sarah Maxwell and I'm an elementary
educator here in south Portland.
I wrote a longer letter to the board and leadership,
but I wanted to take the opportunity to share pieces
of it here with the broader community. If anyone would
like a copy of the full letter.
Please reach out discussions about closing an elementary school or
redistricting our schools.
Understandably, bring up strong emotions in our community.
I want to share my perspective as an educator who
has worked in south Portland schools for the past 16
years.
I have served as a classroom teacher, assistant principal MTS,
S a coordinator and math specialist. I have worked at
Dyer skill and Kayla.
The majority of my career was spent at skilling and
I am now in my second year as the math
specialist at Klor.
As we consider the possibility of closing and or redistricting
our elementary schools.
I hope we can keep one central question in mind.
How can we create the most equitable educational experience for
all students from pre-K through grade 12.
At the workshop, proximity to neighborhood schools was understandably a
major focus of conversation.
I recognize how important that is for our families, both
logistically and from a community standpoint.
It's also important to consider the learning environment in school,
which is where students spend the vast majority of their
elementary years.
The supports available to a student, the peers they learn
with and the opportunities they have to fully engage in
learning matter, just as much as the proximity of a
student's home to their school building.
Assistant superintendent prince recently shared data showing the demographics across
our five elementary schools.
Including the percentages of students qualifying for free and reduced
lunch students identified as bipo and students from multilingual backgrounds.
I have seen similar data over the years, and I
also have seen how those differences play out in our
classrooms.
Classrooms, reflecting on the data and my lived experience. I
wonder if in the event that the district must close
a school for budget reasons.
Reasons we could use redistricting to create four schools whose
student populations more closely reflect the overall makeup of our
city and more evenly balanced student needs across the buildings.
Buildings. I'd like to share a bit about my experiences
at skill and, and Calor to give some context for
why the concentration of student need matters.
I spent seven years teaching fifth grade at skilling, two
years as assistant principal and five years as the MTSS
S a coordinator.
Skilling is a remarkable school with deeply committed educators. Hold
on seconds.
Students from an incredibly rich range of backgrounds.
The diversity of languages, cultures, and experiences in that building
is one of its greatest strengths.
Strengths. My name is Julia Bonner and I'll be yielding my
time.
At the same time skill and has the largest elementary
student population in the district.
And many of its students face a range of challenges
from economic hardship to multilingual learning to other academic needs.
The diversity of learners combined with the overall scale of
need creates a level of complexity that can be difficult
to fully understand without having worked there.
Last year, I moved to Kayla as a math specialist.
Kayla serves a similar demographic in many ways, but the
scale is different.
The number of students is roughly half the size of
skill.
Skilling in my current role, I work with 16 to
18 students each day in small tier three.
Intervention groups. My work focuses on strengthening foundational math skills
while also helping students access grade level content.
This includes supporting multilingual learners as they develop the language
needed to explain their mathematical thinking.
I also collaborate closely with teachers to analyze student data
and design instructional supports. And I work with our building
principal MTS, S a coordinator and literacy specialist to strengthen
intervention systems.
While Calor serves a smaller student population. Our staff faces
the daily challenge of meeting the needs of a similarly
diverse group of learners as skill differentiation.
Scaffolding and designing multiple ways for students to access content
are constant and demanding parts of our work.
What I've seen is that when the scale of need
in a building is more proportionate.
Supports can be delivered more consistently.
Interventions can happen earlier and collaboration among educators becomes more
manageable.
When the concentration of need becomes too great.
Even strong systems begin to feel stretched.
This is why I believe that redistricting or reconfiguration could
be more than a budget solution. It could also be
an opportunity to strengthen equity across our elementary schools.
I realized that equity does not mean that every school
must look exactly the same.
However it absolutely should mean that every student.
Regardless of which building they attend has access to similar
levels of support.
Opportunity peer diversity and instructional capacity.
Proximity matters.
Community matters. History matters.
But the distribution of student need matters as well.
And so does whether our systems allow educators to respond.
Effectively to that need. My hope is that as you
continue this process,
equity remains the central commu consideration in the decisions ahead
37. Thank you for your time.
And the carrier putting into this work.
Thank you, Sarah.
All right. Not sure again. Right. My name is Shay
Cupitt and I'm an educator in the district. I shared
a letter with you all, but I wanted to take
a moment tonight to put a face to my name.
And share some of the thoughts represented in my letter
with the community.
I think it is important to share the experience I've
had across the district beginning in 2010 as a student
teacher at Dyer.
In 2011, I was hired as an ed tech at
brown supporting students with autism while completing my dual certification
in special ed.
I returned to Dyer being hired as a second grade
teacher and later taught third grade there until 2021.
During many summers, I also taught one of our programs
for students with autism.
In 2021, I moved into a new role as a
social emotional learning teacher, working at both skill and, and
brown schools.
Today I serve as the literacy specialist at Caler where
I work directly with students and support teachers in their
literacy practices. Not only have I have, I had the
privilege of working in our schools.
I also was a student in them.
My mentor teacher and eventually teaching partner at Dyer was
my second grade teacher. I shared this to illustrate the
lasting impact.
The schools and especially my teachers had on me.
Because of that. I have a vested interest in the
success of our schools and the children in our city.
These experiences are what shape, the perspective I want to
share tonight. This is undoubtedly a pivotal moment for this
city and our schools. The situation we have found, we
find ourselves in trying to determine which difficult decision will
have the least negative impact on our students in community
is in incredibly challenging.
Every option carries real consequences.
Like many in our community, the wait for information outlining
the possible options for our elementary schools has been mentally
and emotionally taxing. I can only imagine how hard this
process has been and will continue to be for our
district leaders, the board and my colleagues. How, however, even
in this difficult moment, I believe there is opportunity.
I know we are up against time and complex logistics
to shift the structure of our elementary schools.
But I do think considering the opportunities we have within
the recommended options is worth exploring to, so the solution
to the budget.
Doesn't unnecessarily cut talented educators or remove critical resources and
supports from students.
Students the greatest opportunity for best student outcomes that I
envision.
Lies within an option for creating grade band schools.
With more teachers at the same grade in one building.
Collaboration and professional learning can become more focused and efficient.
Also specific supports and scaffolds needed to move student learn
learning forward would be easier to program and accommodate for
this could look like sharing students for small group instruction
that vary appropriately for size and time with the teacher.
More opportunity in bandwidth for extension and drawing on multiple
teacher strengths to share the planning, to implement cohesive instruction.
This kind of structure, not only supports stronger outcomes for
students, but can also reduce the enormous workload that teachers
currently carry.
My name is Melissa Shulk. I'm a parent teacher and
taxpayer in this city and I'm going to gift my
time to Shea. Listen to what she has to say.
thank you.
Another opportunity I see is strengthening peer relationships as teachers.
One of our most important responsibilities is creating a community
that is accepting Foster's empathy, celebrates each individual and creates
a culture of respect so that the most rich learning
can have happen.
While, what we most often see is kids thriving through
their peer relationships. There are some students who do not
have that same experience.
With more students of the same age and grade at
a school, I believe there is a higher likelihood of
connection that can be fostered throughout the elementary years. Even
before students reach the combined middle school.
Perhaps the most important opportunity in all of this is
the possibility of creating more equitable outcomes. For all students.
We have long recognized the differing populations among our schools,
which means each school requires different systems and supports to
ensure our opportunities for growth and achievement. When looking at
the enrollment and demographic data shared at the.
Last workshop. One can imagine that the systems supports and
services at Kahler and skilling require a complex level.
Of coordination, communication and collaboration among all roles in the
schools.
Well, at some points in the day classroom teachers have
other adult support. The teacher is ultimately the one responsible
for differentiating instruction to close learning gaps, build scaffolds for
access to grade level content.
And deliver targeted instruction to all students. This is true
for all teachers at all schools, but with the glaring
differences in population, some of our schools that level of
planning and implementation is magnified. This results in heavier teacher
workload in less face-to-face instructional time for students.
Students moving students to different buildings alone does not create
equity and redistributing students in the name of diversity does
not add automatically lead to better outcomes.
Outcomes, but thoughtful changes to how we structure our schools
can help distribute resources and support more effectively while allowing
teachers to collaborate more efficiently.
I was particularly moved by the comments made by board
member, Tyler Smith at the last workshop, he showed understanding that
the way our schools are currently designed.
We have inherited pockets of segregation.
This impacts the opportunity and achievement of our students.
Students the extra workload, less face-to-face time to do due
to the greater range of differentiation for varying supports needed
and deserved.
Means that not all children in south Portland are able
to thrive in the same way as their same age
peers. This is not a lack of teacher effort and
talent. It is a reality of not enough time human
and physical resources, space, and ultimately money.
I understand that proximity to neighborhood schools is deeply important
to many families.
However, within a student's experience in south Portland schools, they
will attend schools across the city from elementary through high
school.
I hear the constraints of travel and transition for our
youngest learners.
Learners, but our educators are deeply committed to ensuring that
students feel known, valued, and supported, and that would continue
wherever students attend school.
If we are willing to thoughtfully reconsider our current structures,
this difficult moment could also become an opportunity to disrupt
injustice.
And create greater equity within all of our schools.
When classrooms reflect the diversity of the broader community, it
strengthens empathy, enriches learning, and ultimately makes teachers better practitioners.
Practitioners. I know this is three months. I know this
personally.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Yeah, they're so close.
Hey there. My name is Maureen Richards.
I have been teaching in the district for 30 years.
And I also live in south Portland and my two
children went through south Portland schools.
So I will make this short and sweet because we've
heard a lot of amazing you'll information if you'll just
dig right into the microphone. Oh, thank don't. Don't touch
the microphone. I got I won't make icon contacts.
Sorry. Look right, right. Straight ahead. So thank you so
much. Thank you so much.
First of all, just a greatly appreciate all the work
that you all have done. I have to look at
the admin team. Thank you.
And the board and you're just working so hard to
create a budget that really reflects.
Reflects our district priorities and his fiscally.
Responsive to the situation that we are all in.
I'm gonna speak about something completely different than we haven't
heard tonight. I would like to ask you to reconsider
the use of portables.
Portables. We cannot provide the same level of security for
our students and staff in portables.
Portables students should not be walking outside to go in
and outta the building to go to the bathroom, to
go see a nurse unintended by an adult.
Many of us at small school have taught in the
portables and we can share with you really specific examples
of the challenges that we have been faced with.
No one is currently in those buildings now.
It is important for you to hear these firsthand.
Expect perspectives to help you make informed decisions from those
of us who have lived in those experiences.
So I encourage you to reach out. We could perhaps
plan a meeting, whatever.
Works, but at another, you know,
a lot of other people wanna speak tonight, but I
really think you need to hear those perspectives regarding portables
mm-hmm . Thank you very you very much. Thank you
so much. Thank you.
Hi there. I'm Christina Grael. I live on 81 settler
road.
I am a third generation. SoPo red riot. I have.
A daughter that goes to Dyer school. I'm a teacher
and I am a union representative for the S P
T.
I thank you to Dr. Entwistle and Dr. Prince. And
thank you to the board.
And everyone here, I'm amazed by the enthusiasm.
And the civility that is being exercised here in our
local government. I think that's something to be proud of.
I just wanted to share quickly.
Some perspective as somebody growing up here and then come
becoming as a teacher here and then having.
A student that goes here.
When I grew up in south Courtland, it was obviously
not the same school district as it was now. In
fact, I would say that it was not as great
as it was now.
I think that south Portland has become leaps and bounds
from when I was in elementary school and on.
When I got my teaching.
Certificate. And when I started teaching, I started teaching in
a different district. And then I came over to south
Portland in 2019 and I found.
Such an amazing and organized.
District. And I was amazed by the organization.
I was amazed by the professionalism. I was amazed by
the rigor coming from a different district in south Portland.
Today. I don't feel that as much. I feel.
That
I am just so.
Confused that we are in this situation, having.
To pour so much energy.
Into just
getting by rather than pouring things.
Into our students, right.
And
and I'm just
like I said, I'm still just so amazed that we're
in this situation.
With all of the real estate tax revenue that we
get from ocean house properties, all the way to commercial
properties on the east side.
And we are needing to make such slashes to our
school district.
And it's a repeat. This is, and again, this was
a repeat from last year.
That we had to go through this torturing.
Process.
So with absolute transparency as a must for a, for
us in such a difficult situation.
I appreciate all of the data, 30 seconds.
About the budget drivers and however,
I can't overlook that the teacher in education professionals secured
livable incomes was appointed out several times as one of
those drivers, but we still don't know where.
The fund budget went to, I'd like to ask as
a taxpayer for an itemized data for the savings.
Savings and expenses for the fun balance from FY 2021.
I think knowing what types of things this fund balanced
is used for would provide a lot of clarity.
For our community. That's three minutes. I have so much
more to say thank you very much, but I'll be
back. Thank you.
Good evening.
My name's Alexander Hitchen. I live in south Portland.
And I'm proud to say I have a daughter.
At small school.
Over the past two years.
This district has faced repeated budget crises.
Last year, roughly 5 million had to be cut.
This year, the proposal includes about 8.4 million in reductions.
Including 77 staff reductions.
And unmodeled closure of dire elementary.
These are permanent structural decisions.
Decisions affecting students, families.
And the stability of our schools.
And I also want to acknowledge the teachers who took
the time to be here tonight.
You're the reason, you know, families.
Care so deeply about getting these decisions, right.
And I also want to acknowledge.
That you know,
great teachers like, like, like the ones we have here
in south Portland, you know, become exceptional.
Through years of experience.
You know, reducing that experience to solve a short-term.
Budget problem is an extremely shortsighted approach.
And while this is still being described as only a
proposal.
The discussion tonight has made clear that people.
Who may be affected are expected to be warned as
soon as possible.
Well before the budget and re reductions have even been
approved.
That means the consequences of this proposal.
Are already beginning.
Before the public processes complete.
I understand that workshops allow the public to discuss the
proposal.
But public discussion.
Is not the same thing as independent.
Independent financial review.
Board member Richardson.
Has already suggested holding off on major changes until a
permanent.
Superintendent is in place.
With the goal of appointing that person. I think by
1st of July, this year,
that alone should give us pause.
Pauses. If you are asking.
Teachers and families to absorb the consequences.
You should be willing to accept.
Independent scrutiny.
Yourselves.
So my question is this.
Will chair DeAngelis.
DeAngelos 30 seconds. I'm the sport commit to my tonight.
Tonight to placing on your next agenda, a vote to
commission, an independent external audit.
Of the district's budgeting and financial oversight.
Over the last five years with the findings made public.
Before any school closure Des decision is made.
If you believe that is unnecessary.
Then, please explain why independent review is not.
Warranted these decisions. That's three minutes are permanent.
An independent audit is a reasonable step before making permanent
changes based on preventable mistakes. Thank you. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you very much.
My name is Meredith diamond. I'm a south Portland resident.
I'm a mom of four. The youngest of whom is
in the first grade at small school. I'm a, also
a in my 25th year as an educator in the
state of Maine, 19 years of which are in the
classroom.
And six of those I spent as an administrator.
About 10 years ago. I was.
Talking to a veteran administrator. He was a principal. Who's.
Teacher retention rate out.
Outscored the rest of Cumberland county and given the significance
of teacher retention on student learning.
I wanted to know his secret.
He explained that ex through experience, he had learned that
all of his failures.
Failures as a school administrator were failures of process.
If your process is good, he said inclusive.
Fair and well, reasoned.
Then even when stakeholders don't agree with outcomes, they can
respect them.
At last week's budget workshop, Dr. Stern.
Referenced the experience gained in the success, realized through the
consolidation of middle schools.
And those are offered as evidence. That elementary school consolidation
is something at which we can succeed as well.
Except
the consolidation of the middle schools was a five year
process.
And at last week's budget workshop, the teachers and the
families.
And the students in this community.
Learned that the district wanted to consolidate five elementary schools
in just five months.
This is a failure of process.
There isn't time to educate stakeholders.
About the challenges that we're facing.
There isn't time for community focus groups.
And meaningful feedback there. Isn't time to walk back the
hurt and alienation that this will cause.
There is not time to do this well.
There isn't time.
For you to make this feel.
This consolidation feel
like something that you are doing with us.
Instead of something that you are doing to us.
I appreciate
very much the board's emphasis on transparency and accountability and
kudos to the previous speaker.
And as we can see transparency and accountability, take time.
Please.
Give this process, the time that it needs to be
done well.
Please.
Take enough time and give us the opportunity to do
this with you.
30 seconds. Thank you.
Hi, I'm bill Newton. I'm a proud parent of a
skill and kindergartner. I have a variety.
Of questions and comments. First, I wanted to thank the
board and the administration for the hard work on putting
together the presentations and the conversation on this topic.
Last week, there were many requests for more proactive communication
about the school closure plan.
I noticed an email the day after from the district
discussing the meeting did not reference the potential for school
closure at all in the body of email. So I
just wanted to reiterate the request for more proactive communication
to get the most reach possible out on this difficult
decision we have head of us.
Kind of a random question, but what is the impact
of deferring the $300,000 on the athletic field bond? Like,
are we already looking at additional deferrals in future years
or what is the total cost of deferring that for
a couple of years?
And is the elimination of 14 positions in food service.
Transportation food, service, transportation, and custodial all from the elementary.
Regorg those seem like.
Positions that would be sort of staffed appropriately anyway. So
I was just wondering about that.
And then after two years of significant cuts, I'm wondering
what does 2028 look like? Rolling forward this 20, 27 proposed
budget.
Like would we already be seeing the need for additional
cuts based on known staffing?
Cost increases or other needs.
And finally
Dr. Prince mentioned the facility savings as vital for the
elementary school reductions.
The matrix models showed that the facility savings was.
Under 400,000 of three to 3.5 million of savings.
Savings that amount. Isn't nothing, but it doesn't seem like
it would be, make or break for this decision. I'm
not inherently against reconfiguration as I trust the reasons given
as to why it's the ideal solution for academic incomes
or valid. But I agree with board member Richardson, that
this is a decision, a new superintendent.
Should be involved in for a unified vision for the
future.
And I very much support finding solution to buy more
time to identify the appropriate long-term answer.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Hi, my name is K Dr. Caitlin K Foley. My
doctor is an ed D or a doctorate education. My
discipline is kinesiology and my expertise includes physical activity across
the lifespan. I'm gonna stay in my lane and talk
about my expert expertise to tonight. So that's why I
entered introduce that I live at 27 Massa.
Massachusetts Ave. And I have two daughters in the south
Portland school system, one in fifth grade at the middle
school, and one in kindergarten at skilling I've compiled a
literature review about walking to elementary school and the concept
of walking school buses. All my information is from P
peer reviewed source. I have handouts for the count.
As I will not be reading the citations out loud.
And for those listening, please know, I have included 16
peer reviewed citations.
Citations also forgive me for a couple of misspellings. I'm
also a tired educator.
this evening. I'd like to expand on last week's
thoughts about budget and closing and reconfiguring and reorganizing our
elementary schools.
A point made last week was about the idea of
neighborhood schools and walking patterns and the frequency of students
walking.
Skilling was mentioned as a school that had the lowest
number of walkers that could walk.
With the only determining factor presented.
As living within a one mile radius of the school
building.
However, as a resident of the skill and area, I
can attest that the distance from sunset park, Wilkinson park.
Includes having to cross 2 95 and the I 95 spur
entrance, which is about six lanes. And I'm not gonna
walk MCK kindergartner over that.
It, I believe if you ask the families on the
other side of 2 95,
a busy intersection of Broadway and Westbrook street, kind of
like the Redbank Brook hill area. They may say something
similar, even though we're still in the one mile radius.
By reorganizing our elementary schools. You may be eliminating many
families from walking to school.
Regardless of which elementary school the children attend. And if
they are no longer attending the school, the geographically live
near and walk to.
Let's talk about the benefits of walking to school. It
is well known that physical activity even bouts, less than
10 minutes shows statistically significant.
Improvement in health measures, BMI, weight control, body fat, mass,
and cognitive improvements in concentration and performance in elementary school
children.
Walking to school has many additional benefits, including enhances ch
enhancing children's self-efficacy.
Promoting physical activity and mil mental wellbeing.
Active commuting and or programs like walking school buses may
increase physical activity and reduce the risk of excess weight
gain or later adiposity. So this is a study that
looked at kindergartners who walk to school and that they
didn't gain additional fat mass on their body bodies when
they to fifth grade. Oh my gosh. I have so
much more, but that's why I print.
Printed it off for you? All my biggest point.
Is that there's so much information within my field. And
I hope that you think about.
Kids being able to go to the schools within.
Their neighborhoods.
Neighborhoods. And by closing any one of our schools, you
push children and families to participate in more passives, such
as car or bus transport rather than active transport. And
they miss out on that valuable family time.
So, thank you very much. I will be back next
week. Here are your handouts.
Handouts Lauren Piero Deek street.
It is tough to sit here and consider the level
of disruption a school closure and reconfiguration would cause for
only 2 million in savings.
Savings, especially because this city just offered 2.5 million to purchase
the Walgreens at cash corner.
For this site of a new police station.
The optics here are really bad.
In terms of redistricting, what does that look like?
When can we see the actual breakdown of school attendance
zones?
Zones being proposed voters. Wanna see this before the budget
goes to council?
Well before the referendum.
As for school closure, if it were to become a
reality,
do we really believe that Kayla is the better location
to remain open.
Do we know that without a doubt that whatever is
currently traveling or has traveled through Portland pipeline's land and
air is safe for our children.
Frankly roof repair savings of 200,000 does not justify.
Placing children next to heavy industry.
I asked the board to reconsider which school is considered
to close.
I also ask that the city of south Portland.
To pull their offer for purchase of Walgreens and give
that money to the schools.
Should a school be closed. Taylor's location is far better
suited for public safety than an elementary school.
Not to mention this buys us time to be more
thoughtful and less urgent about next steps for our district.
In regards to pre-K. I have so many questions is
pre-K currently mandated.
Mandated is pre-K expansion mandatory. I've received conflicting answers so
far.
Will pre-K be a full day or remain a half
day program in the fall.
We know, half day pre-K limits access and does not
serve working families.
What is the current cost of pre-K? What is the
cost to fund pre-K and ex pre-K expansion and housing
of CDs.
CDs. What does our budget look like?
If we do not offer pre-K programming.
If state funding only covers 20% of our student cost,
should we be expanding programs? We cannot afford.
Lastly, I wanted to call out that the reevaluation of
taxes only got re redistributed.
And did not increase the tax base.
Residential values increased. Whereas commercial values decreased.
To solve this problem for our schools and our city.
Lacks our city's lack of funding. I say, find the
tax money by increasing the value of the under assessed
and unfairly assessed tank farms.
Farms and commercial properties. Thank you.
Thank you, Lauren.
Hi, I'm Scott Lusardi. I live on Romano road. I'm
resident, long-term resident of south Portland.
Heard a lot about fiscal responsibility and making a.
Financially responsible decision.
I think last week there was a good presenting presentation
to save a lot of money over five years.
We're now looking at saving a small amount in one
year.
What's gonna happen next year when we gotta pay.
3.3 million for Skillings.
Ones boiler.
And we're gonna have the.
Field and everything going through. So.
I think you're saying financial responsibility and making a financial
fiscal dis decision.
I don't think you are. I, I think you need
to re-look at things.
That's it.
Thank you, Scott.
Hi, my name is Chris Payne, 76 Elizabeth Taylor lane.
I'm here as a father of a.
Second grader who loves
loves attending Dyer elementary and loves the environment, just like
myself.
I'm also here as a Marine scientist who has studied
environmental conservation off and on for over 20 years.
I've also been on the conservation commission for the past
three years. And I'm currently on the comprehensive planning committee.
Where I've seen a couple of you at, so I
absolutely understand how difficult your roles can be.
But also understand the value of listening to our community,
especially when it relates to the petroleum tanks that are
located adjacent to Caler and their proximity to residents and
students.
Students. I love Dyer. We all love Dyer. It's a
perfect elementary school and a great location with a phenomenal
green space.
It's even been discussed within the city of, of having
a future.
For community events as a building, it's not going anywhere.
So why would we consider closing it as a school?
In favor of Kayla, which is on a significantly smaller
piece of land at 4.6 acres with no ability to
grow.
Instead of dire, which is on over seven acres of
land and has significant room to grow.
We need to stop rushing and evaluate some alternative funding
opportunities to keep dire. If it is inevitably.
On the chopping block and we shouldn't be prioritizing roof
repairs over the health of our kids.
A member of the school board once wrote a letter
pushing for natural grass over turf because they claim their
artificial turf was so dangerous for the health of our
students.
Students, they urge this bill to be passed to quote.
Lives, but keeping students next to potential VOC exposure.
Is evidently just fine.
Kayla abuts, multiple petroleum tank farms owned by the Portland
pipeline company.
That represent current health risk exposure to children, teachers, staff
in the residents to volatile organic compound pounds POCs.
POCs like benzene and toluene, which can put children at
risk for many life-threatening diseases. This school is only hundreds
of feet within the range of these tanks. It's not
that far.
Whether the students are actively at risk each day can
of course vary.
But if you have the opportunity.
To remove students from this school.
That you all claim to have that their safety in
mind for, to remove them out of a very potentially
hazardous area. How is this even a discussion?
If my daughter went to Kayla.
And I found out there was a chance for her
to leave. I would help them pack.
I understand the challenges that you all face.
But closing Taylor would remove children from a high risk
area where safety protocols for dangerous tanks are still being
evaluated.
And all of this, when you have a perfectly good
school in dire, which is not going away.
And it's within safety of the city limits.
Limits, please don't continue to put our children at risk
because we don't wanna pay for a new roof. We
need to continue to push for additional funding for all
of our schools and be one of the rare leaders
that prioriti.
Prioriti prioritizes education, health, and the safety of our kids.
Thanks.
Thank you, Chris.
Hi, my name's Charlie Fox. I live on 2 25 Evans
street.
My son goes to dyers at kindergarten. I walk him
in the morning and then he takes a.
Bus to RMA after care.
What he just said, I, he pretty much ant said
everything I was about to say. And gentleman over here.
Also, is there anything I say I'm a business owner
business owner for 13 years.
I caught my landlord skimming off our cams, caught my
maintenance.
Pay his pay his employees.
Employees. I called a cam audit on him. We sat
down.
Stacks of papers went through. 'em all.
I or you guys and us, us people in the
room of five year cam audit.
On Wacam audit. I want an audit on everything that
happened.
Why are we here at this budget?
I also own a business. So with that said,
I took out COVID money. I budgeted out for five
years.
For my COVID money, knowing what is gonna run out
when it's gonna run out and what's gonna happen.
And how the budget that, how are we here? Not
budgeting out five years.
Where is our budget plans?
Plans. There is no budget plans. We're looking one year
ahead.
Each year we're sitting here in another talk.
Why aren't we budgeting out five years ahead of us.
Where's the business plan. Schools are businesses. This is not
a community base. It's a business. We're running a business.
We need to treat it like a business.
All right, so we need a budget out. I wanna
know where the money's going and why we're keep getting
into this situation.
So I, with him say, we need to audit.
On this whole situation right now.
Going on with a tanks down there.
I live on Evan street.
And I there's an app called smell my city.
I'm seeing some people might know it in here.
I report probably about once a week on that app,
smell my city. I can smell.
Those tanks out there and the VOCs coming to my
house on Evans street.
So having school children next to those tanks.
Tanks. My son was able to go to that school
for pre-K and we chose not to.
And it was hard for us to figure out what
to do with our son during that time.
But it is frustrating because I did not want put
my kid near VOCs. No children should be near that.
There's studies about now Geo's done studies on this.
Many people have done studies being close to power lines.
Servers and the tanks having VOCs.
VOCs. It's frustrating. And then talking about skillents I agree
skillents should stay open 30 seconds, but we have a
boiler problem over there. That's gonna cost you guys millions
of dollars to replace.
It's frustrating that we are rushing into this. And I
think everybody up here.
Agrees that we are rushing into this way too fast,
with little information.
Tonight, finding out that DY closing.
Dyer's closing without any information on this. It's it's ridiculous.
And you guys shake your heads up there saying Dyer's
not closing.
You've already made the decision going ahead.
And that is what's frustrating. Me and a lot of
people around here.
That's that's three minutes. Thank you very much.
My name's tad Martin.
I've got a fifth grade, former dire student, a current
kindergarten dire student.
Student and a couple years of Dillard dire student, and
I'm a former di student of many, many, many decades.
It's
it's I just worry about closing the school.
That when
we put all the kids into the student and they
had schools.
It's gonna increase the class size, take the chance of
over Arkansas, even more than they already are.
Kids are gonna get lost in the cracks because they're
gonna be, so teachers are gonna be overworked. And it's
nice that my fifth grader was able to tell my
kindergarten and say, oh, you're gonna love this teacher. The
teacher's great soul fun and everything like that. And having.
The smaller class sizes.
Sizes, the teacher were able to form that rapport.
That long-term rapport and having to.
Continue on through
not the generations of kids, but the kids.
I really, I like that. And I think closing the
school clothing, any school.
It's gonna affect that ability to.
Continue it by putting too much strain on the other
four schools.
So, thank you. Thank you so much.
Hi there. My name is Heather Willette and I'm a
resident of winding way with two students at Dyer elementary.
I wanted to start by thanking the board members who
not only read my very lengthy email this week that
I sent, but also to took time to respond to
me. I appreciate that. And I encourage any residents of
our community who are able to.
To reach out to you guys.
And share their thoughts and opinions.
Opinions tonight. I wanna share my thoughts on the specific
portion of the proposal that includes closing dire over Kayla.
I wanna be clear that what I shared does not
mean that I'm in support of closing an elementary school.
Especially since it seems that the focus has shifted from
saving upwards of 3 million, that would seemingly have long long-term
impact to relief in the budget to a much less
significant amount of just under $300,000.
I'm very hopeful. After hearing many of you speak with
confidence in the possibility of passing a budget, that would
keep all five schools open a question that remains for
me is looking at redistricting couldn't. We continue to think
about it as all schools remaining per pre-K to, to
four, not half a to do any splits. And what
would the impact to.
Staff be, if that were to happen.
With the considering
an increase in class sizes as has been noted.
That being said, I am concerned about children.
Attending Kayla elementary with the known VOC emissions from the
petroleum tanks that are located adjacent.
They do pose a known health risk due to their
impact on air quality.
Dr. Andrew Smith from the main CDC spoke at the city
council meeting on October 14th.
Sharing that three years of data.
Showed that there was an elevated level of benzene emissions
from the Pearl street tanks. I know those are not
the ones next to Taylor, but I will get to
that.
This elevated level is above the ambient air quality guidelines
for tolerable air pollution in residential areas. Okay. So this
guideline represents a potential for long-term health risks to people
near the, that project. Self Portland is a, has a
map of the city in it shows locations of the.
Bulk of the petroleum storage facilities within our city.
Kayla is the only school that is located.
Inside of one of those areas.
Areas the project south Portland website also highlights the health
impacts from the four airborne chemicals released from these tanks.
Tanks as noted previously, this includes benzene, which has the
known ability to cause leukemia damaged blood cells and the
nervous system, the three other chemicals, which I'm not even
gonna attempt to pronounce are listed as causing problems for
the respiratory system, liver brain kidneys, and as well as
damage to developing fetus.
Since the full report isn't available till this summer or
the fall of 20, 26 30 seconds.
Dr. Smith was asked about elevated levels from other collection
points.
And he shared that.
The like, including the one next to Kayla right on
the backyard there.
That there will likely be elevated levels at those points
as well. So I urge you to not support a
plan that includes increasing the enrollment of students at Caler
elementary school.
Until we have more information on this point. I, for
one, wouldn't feel comfortable with my children being in that
environment.
Unless we had more answers, some families would have the
ability to make that decision for themselves. No matter what
happens with the schools closing.
School's closing and others will not. So essentially it would
magnify the inequities that are already existing within our community.
Thank you very much.
Everyone. My name is mark Maus. You live at 75
Cleveland circle.
My oldest before I came here, he told me that
dire dragons are helpful.
So, I guess I'm doing my part to help my
community with what I have to say.
First off, thanks to the board in the district for
the work you're doing. This is an easy, I know
it. And you're taking a lot of questions and criticism,
so can appreciate the work you're doing in the district
as well.
The question I have for the board is, is this
the right time to make a decision this big.
You know, we have a superintendent vacancy.
Coming up, you know, we have some new leadership coming
in, maybe new ideas.
Ideas worth considering. I also know there's a budget shortfall.
I think there's also a budget surplus for the city,
right?
The city that also unveiled their comprehensive plan for 2040.
What city will come up with a comprehensive plan and
then shown their students. Shouldn't we be investing in our
schools. Shouldn't we be seeing if the city can help
us out here and bail us out. I know we're
looking at all these other options, but that seems like
a very logical option to go to the city and
see if they can help us out. So, a question
I had a follow up to that is.
Can the district and board engage with the city collaboratively
to see if that's an option. I mean, maybe it
is an option. Maybe they say, Hey, rainy day fund.
Your budget problem is solved or at least greatly reduced.
This isn't an issue that's going away anytime soon.
If you pick up a newspaper, this is all over
the place. I'm an old soul. So I love reading
newspapers still. It's all over Maine. It's all over the
country. These budget battles, we have to get collaborative in
how we approach them.
Part of being collaborative is helping it open dialogue.
Several, several of my neighbors are here because I ran
into them on the street. They had no idea this
was happening today.
There has been enough new, like enough time to share
the news, to get people involved and just talk about
this openly. So just encourage the board to, you know,
understand you have to make.
Fast decisions, but to involve the community.
And if you're looking to close a school, do a
side-by-side analysis, right? Put everything out in the table. A
lot of people raised.
Comments about health and safety. Look at enrollment trends. Look
at transportation. There's a lot to consider in making a
challenging decision like this. So just hope that you will
take the time and think this through and make a
good decision. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Hi, my name is Julia Tate. I'm at 180 5 Evans, and
I also have a student at Dyer.
And just to build on what the last speaker said,
you know, I.
This slides that were presented tonight.
Represented that maybe the decision to close Dyer was based
on an increase of $200,000 in terms of the roof
repair. And I'm certain that that is not the only
information. And so we, I would really appreciate C a
Mort in-depth and analysis presented of the.
Considerations between all of the schools that were considered. And
I know there was a lot of information last week,
but there.
There're there are still a lot of unanswered questions in
terms of busing transportation.
Overall impacts on traffic flow.
And then the other kind of follow-up question I have
to that is that whether or not any income generating
options have been explored.
Actually something distributed across all of the existing buildings that
are currently serving the district.
And then the, the last point I'd like to speak
to.
Is is really getting back to, you know, tying this
to broader consideration over the whole district, what the city
is doing with their comprehensive plan work.
There's been a lot of conversation around capacity.
And if I understood it correctly,
we the school district.
After the school district currently would have, essentially, if you
do the math of the capacity versus what enrollment currently
has, roughly 23%.
When a new school project is considered, we typically.
Look to focus to provide 10 to 20% of potential
capacity for increased enrollment. So really.
It doesn't seem like we're that far off. And I
I've heard a lot of people in the neighborhood say,
well, you know,
this is something that a lot of towns are grappling
with right now. You know, schools are closing everywhere.
And I think when I look at the numbers of
those.
Communities in those neighborhoods, a lot of those schools are
looking at.
Reduced enrollment where they're looking at 50% or less. So
I, I think, yes, this is happening everywhere, but I
think the circumstances are very different.
And then the last thing I wanna say is that,
you know, the enrollment that was looked at, and that
was shared last week, I think went back to 2018.
And oftentimes when we consider these enrollment patterns,
patterns. We sometimes even look at 100 year time periods.
There can be.
Considerable fluctuation.
In population numbers, 30 seconds. So I would just urge
this group to look at those numbers more broadly, more
in depth, because if we have a few of these
affordable housing,
projects be constructed. You know, it would, I don't know
how we're building in raising 70 to 90 million for new
school. If we find ourselves short in the near future.
Or if one of these buildings need to be replaced
within that timeframe.
Considering that tax burden versus.
This tax burden. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Hello, my name is Christine Dobson. I am a third
grade teacher at skill and school.
I live in south Portland and I have two students
who currently attend schools here in south Portland.
My daughter attends Gillen school.
And my son is a sophomore in high school.
I also have two children that have graduated from south
Portland.
There were several recommendations at the end of the boundaries
and configuration meetings in 2024, may of 2024.
The one recommendation that was honored and upheld.
Upheld for the last two years was to keep classroom
numbers at skill and Caler low.
Lowe in order to meet the needs of our learners.
Learners. I went back to take a look at the
slides.
From 2024, and it was stated that.
The proposed action that was stated it was to increase.
Teacher to student ratios in high need schools.
That did happen. Our numbers stayed.
Very low even last year.
In a, during a budget.
Situation and we, we maintain those low classroom numbers.
It has made a very positive difference.
Based on the proposal to close the school. I understand.
That the numbers at skilling will increase.
It appears that skill and will move from four classrooms.
Classrooms to three classrooms at grade.
Three and four placing.
Numbers directly into the twenties.
Twenties, this takes place even before any additional students from.
Dyer would, could potentially join us based on their location
in proximity.
It seems that every third and fourth grade classroom throughout
the district will have these high numbers as 24 students
at this level is the cap.
We will be unable to continue implementing the beneficial proposed.
Action. That came as a result of the boundaries and.
Committee next year, according to the proposal tonight.
I would like to know.
Are we officially moving away from the work.
That took place in the committee in may of 2024.
There was only one.
Piece of that proposal.
That moved forward and now it appears we are not.
Taking that into consideration seconds.
If not
I would like to know how we can plan to
support the wide range of learners.
Learners that skill in school and Kayla's school will now
have.
In much larger classrooms.
Classrooms will more human resources be allocated to these schools.
It feels like an important piece to be considered.
To, to
equitably meet the needs of our students.
Students and that's three minutes, Christine. Okay, great.
Thank you. Thank you very, very much.
Much I'm Ms. Edwards.
Edwards. Good evening. My name's Julia Edwards. I live on Dawson
street. I'm not gonna go through my, like,
long ties to south Portland. Cause I think that's kind
of irrelevant actually to what we're here to talk about.
But I do have a great deep love and respect
for this community. And.
What I need to
I need to ask just a series of questions, I
guess. And I'm not sure if that is, I guess
that's through you, but I have a feeling Dr. Prince
is gonna be a lot of the, the expertise by
answering any of these questions. And I don't expect these
answers tonight just to be clear.
I would like to understand.
What it would look like.
If we close a school.
And reconfigure.
Reconfigure. And I want all of those scenarios gamed out.
Please.
I'm hearing a lot of.
People willingly and just really excited about potentially throwing a
couple of our schools under the bus.
Figuratively. I don't literally
to save their own school.
And that, that concerns me.
So I would like to know what it would look
like to close small school. I would like to know
what it would look like to close brown school.
To close Taylor to close Dyer. We went through the
skill and scenario.
So I'm clear on those details.
Details. But I think if we're going to actually do
something about this, that is long-lasting and equitable.
Whatever your conception of that word is.
We need to really balance out.
And show that we are all.
Not on the chopping block, but we're all gonna bear
some burden together through this.
I don't understand why it hasn't even been brought up.
Like
that small could be, it could be closed.
Or that we could reconfigure, like, and I'm not advocating
for that. Just so no one eggs, my car. I'm
not saying it's closed small school. .
But also, I'm not saying not to.
So if we could please just be very deliberate in
looking at the choices we have, which are all bad
choices.
All of these choices really, really stink.
We know that, but here's where we are.
What are the choices and let's make the best choice
possible. That does the least.
Direct harm. And so I wanna see 30 seconds what
those numbers look like for both closing each school.
By itself and not reconfiguring.
And closing each school and also reconfiguring.
And everything. I don't know if Lynn McEwen is still
here, but everything she said, I'd like everyone in the
world to rewind.
This recording and listen to her again. And really please.
I echo everything. She said it better than I ever
could. So.
Thank you. Appreciate it. Thank you, Julie. Thanks Julia.
Just speak. Hi, my name is Teresa. I have a
student at Dyer.
And I have a question. I know that in 2028,
the state is.
Removing children who are currently with CDs, like three and
four year olds with CDs into the public school system.
I understand that this isn't affecting our budget because the
state is paying for them, but they're not providing space.
We are now talking about closing a school and I
would like to know.
Do we have any information on how many.
Three and four year olds were gonna be entering the
schools and will we have space for them?
In 2028. That's my only question. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Is there anyone else who would like to speak.
I'm just gonna speak from here. I received a letter
that I was asked to read.
And it's from Ralph Baxter Jr.
Who lives on New York avenue?
He said first, thank you all for serving on the
board of education. I understand the commitment it takes.
To do your job well and appreciate your work.
I thought I'd share a board history lesson.
Budget season 1994, the board was discussing, closing and consolidating
elementary schools.
Along with the heavy discussion to add all day K
to our schools.
The budget was 80% staff and 20% everything else.
Budget guidelines ranged from zero to 3%.
Please take tonight's superintendent's budget proposal and make it yours.
Yours trust this process. Listen, ask questions, compromise, and take
your time. Remember that for everyone who speaks.
Speaks. There are many others who can't or won't speak.
I support the proposed
reconfiguration proposals.
Proposals because of the equity and expanded educational opportunities.
Reconfiguration will lead to integration in our schools.
Use south Portland middle school as a working model to
build and learn from.
Kids are resilient and will adjust to the new way.
Look at all the students who survived all day in
1994, I'm guessing some of you are part of tonight's
audience. I end with a question to be answered as
part of this process. How did we get here and
what are we doing to prevent a repeat next year?
I thank you very much. Ralph Baxter.
So there were a number of questions.
Questions that were asked and.
I tried to record those and I'm assuming the superintendent
did as well. And.
There's a couple things that.
I can potentially
answer.
And
what I don't answer. I'll ask the superintendent to answer
and what, neither one of us can answer. We'll get
back to you.
So I, there was a question.
Is there money in the city budget?
To reallocate funds to the school department.
We are a department of the, of the city.
So that's the same pool of money.
So the city can't take money from its budget and
give it to ours. It's the same.
Where we're like the police department or the fire department
or the parks and rec the differences.
Is there is a, a school board that oversees the
budget here.
This budget goes on referendum.
In June, that's a mandate by the state statute.
But there, but moving money around.
Just is taking from the same pool of money.
And from the same people. So that's.
That's that, that sort of begs the question that was
raised earlier.
By board member Smith. If we.
Wanted more money. It would be just going back and
asking if we could increase our budget allocation. So that
was one question.
Let me just see if I can.
So
the the, that was the same thing that somebody else
asked a similar thing.
About the money that was.
That has not been expended by the way, for the
new police department.
So one of the things I would first say to
you, if you have not been in the police department,
I would encourage you to go in.
It is below sea level.
It is leaking through the basement.
There is mold growing. It is inhabitable and really dangerous
for.
In both our police and fire department.
So
the, the money that the, the city is.
Trying to raise first would be the purchase of the
property of Walgreens for the.
Spot, but then it would also take.
An about an 85 plus or minus million dollar bond.
That would have to go out to the voters for
referendum.
And it would, it would.
Necessitate the community.
Voting for that in order to go forward with that
construction.
So
yeah, there, there was another question.
That was about whether we're mandated for.
pre-K and I
would ask that to, to use superintendent, aunt whistle or
to.
I would, I would ask Dr. Prince.
Sure. So we do have a legislative mandate.
That we will take over.
Special education services for three to four year olds.
Olds that again does not mean the provision of services.
Services for all students, but it does mean the.
Coordination for compulsory attendance in Maine does not start at
pre-K.
pre-K so that, that is a change.
And certainly
the board is faced with and we all are faced
with difficult decisions.
Decisions about how can we invest?
During a time of
budget being constrained.
As long as I've been here for the four years.
Moving towards universal pre-K has been.
A a value that has come up in every budget
season with a desire to move towards that.
Certainly though the pace at which we do that, or
the model, whether it's partnership.
Or through local funding, certainly the board can weigh in
on the direction and the pace of the change.
So hopefully that helps. Thank you very much.
There were a couple other questions that one of them
was around asking.
Us to do an independent audit.
We have an audit every year.
We, it is part of the audit that is done
by the city.
Done for the city. I should say it is an
independent audit firm.
And that already takes place.
That information is available. It's available on the city website
and I believe it's also available.
On the school website.
But anybody who wants information about that audit it's public
information and we can get it.
And that is already done annually.
Again, there were multiple questions about shouldn't the city help
us. And I.
Wanna use the expression that most people are familiar with.
That's stealing from Peter to pay Paul, you know, it's,
it's the same pool of money.
So
the city's not
not producing. They get their money from the same place.
That we get our money from and that's from the
taxpayers. The, and everybody is a taxpayer, including renters.
Renters are paying taxes through their rental.
Property. And if taxes go up.
That, that property owner is going to increase rent. So
I, I don't want people to think that that it's
only people who own property.
Who pay taxes? It's not.
And the other thing I would say about that is
that.
This city.
Previously had prior to COVID was about.
Our tax base was about 70% commercial.
And 30% residential.
That has almost completely
switched since C O V.
And that's why you would see there's a lot of
commercial property that is available and that is.
Open because that brick and mortar.
Model for running businesses.
Is is happening less and less with large, with large
corporations.
So we have a, we have new and.
And energetic.
Small businesses coming into the community.
They are taxpayers, but that property burden has sh that
that tax burden has shifted.
More to individual.
Residential owners than it was before.
And
there was a question.
Some questions asked by Ms. Edwards is.
You know, asking us to.
Look at what closure would look like and reconfiguration would
look like. And so that's a, and she was saying,
thankfully, she didn't want that answer tonight or didn't expect
it tonight.
But to be deliberative in our.
Choices and, and trying to make decisions that cause the
least harm, which I think is the goal of this
board.
And the
last question was asked by a speaker.
About
whether
we're moving away from the.
Goal the, the recommendations of boundaries and configurations.
And, and if we're not, or if we are.
How do we support those students?
Students going forward. And I don't know whether you wanna
say anything about that. I, I have some things I
could say, Dr. Prince, but I'm happy to have you
stand up and no, she goes, no, go ahead. You
say it no, you say it. Yeah. I, I
was just going to say that.
I, I think the
recommendations and a couple speakers spoke to it.
Are are not specifically
around our goals around boundaries and configurations. But I think
what some speakers spoke about was that.
The changes if we
were to reconfigure our schools.
That does create greater diversity. And someone said that doesn't
answer the equity.
Question, but that's where then that's the next step. That's
where we go next.
And so I, I think that that's the.
The issue around the recommendations about reconfiguring.
Have to do partly, certainly partly with budget.
But keeping the schools.
On the proposal of, of K to four. And that's
what one of the, several of the speakers spoke to
is.
It does not address the recommendations.
Around
diversity or equity at all.
So, I don't know if you heard any other questions,
the, the skill and boiler.
Oh, the skill and boiler. I.
Don't know if you wanna speak to that member Dowling
about.
I can, if you'd like me to sure. Go ahead.
I actually, wasn't sure if I should do that during
the buildings and grounds report or, or, well, you can
go ahead and do it now. All right. You'll just
have less to say during the report. That's fine. So
following the last budget works workshop.
I was able to
talk with Mike Nally, director of operations and safety and
Harold Blaney director of facilities and grounds to try to.
Figure out was I, was I misremembering something or, or
was there something said that I, that didn't get captured
in the minutes from that meeting?
What had prompted that item to come up on that
building some grounds agenda. And it, it, when I spoke
at the last meeting, I, I was saying, I thought
it was like six months ago. It was actually more
like,
10 or 11 months ago, it was in April of
last year. So what I had had been told by
the.
Former superintendent actually.
He said to me, oh, the, the boiler at Gillan
is on his last legs.
So I thought, oh, I should put that on the
buildings and grounds agenda. And we should talk about that.
So,
then when I went to the buildings and grounds committee
and, and spoke with Mr. Nae, Mr.
Blaney
my question was
basically, you know, tell me about the boiler at Skillman.
Gillen and what Mr. Blaney told me, which I, I
believe was accurate was he said, well, that, that boiler's,
you know,
they don't make 'em like they used to, it's a
really good boiler. It's a steam boiler. We don't do
steam boilers anymore. It's all hot water boilers now.
But he said, you know, I've worked on a lot
of different kind of boilers. I actually kind of enjoy
working on that boiler. So there were, there were no
red flags and looking back on that.
The answer I received was based on the question I
asked and how I asked it. Had I asked.
A question that in, in retrospect, I'm thinking what I
should have asked was.
Tell me about the heating system at skill and elementary
school. If I had asked it that way.
Than what he would've told me. And.
Did tell me last week was that.
The boiler is
not his biggest worry. His biggest worries are, and I'm
gonna read my notes.
Steam distribution pipes.
Pipes steam traps, condensate return system, which involves pipes, pumps,
and valves, vacuum pumps, air handlers.
Pressure control system, otherwise known as all the moving parts.
Yes. Boiler feed water system, water treatment system, heat exchangers,
building automation, controls, and thermostats, which are.
Pneumatic, which is something that was invented in 1895. And
it was pretty cool in 1895, but no one uses.
Uses air powered thermostats anymore.
Venting chimney and more.
So that's why
we were given that number of, oh, it's gonna cost
$3 million to.
Put a new heat heating system in skilling because.
It's not only the boiler that needs to be replaced.
It's all that other stuff that has moving parts that
has high pressure steam running through it that has a
lifespan. And it may be, it, it, I mean, it's
well, over 30 years old, some parts may even be
older than the, that.
So I'm glad I'm able to just give an update
on that.
And, and clarified that there was no.
Like nothing was kept from anybody. There was no crossed
wires. Really? It was that I, I asked.
A very specific question and I got a very specific
answer and.
You know, next time when I have questions that I
think the board wants to know, I'm gonna think.
A little bit harder about making sure I ask the
question that gets.
Gets the, the most sort of useful.
Answer. Did you wanna say more?
Oh, now, now you wanna talk. Sure. Yeah. I just
wanted to follow up on that report on skill and
Mike Nally is traveling for our conference, but I was
able to speak with him today and I had meant
to mention it in the.
Slide deck when I presented earlier.
And that is that the current proposal in front of
you?
Because Mr. Nally and I were not able to connect
until this morning.
It does not yet.
Have a $50,000.
Placeholder recommended.
Amount. If we keep skilling as part of our facilities
footprint next year.
We may want to think about that adjustment to the
budget.
And that represents his research on.
If, if there was supposed.
Suppo catastrophic failure during cold months, we would need to
bring in a portable boiler.
And then we would also need to.
Install that there's pretty substantial.
Construction involved in that. And then we would wanna budget
some for.
At least getting the
system back online through the heating season.
Until we could potentially go out to bond or.
Make a longer term plan. So the proposal in front
of you does not have that 50,000.
And again, I want to.
Reinforce something that
we heard in public comment. This is a proposal decisions
have not been made.
We do anticipate that there will be changes.
Changes. And so again, we wanna be as transparent as
possible about those changes and that would be a revision
that we would wanna make in the coming weeks.
Thank you very much.
If there's no further public comment, the first public comment
is closed. Thank you.
We're going to go.
Back now to the report of committees.
Committees. So we have first the report of the finance
committee.
Member Holman, actually I'm I'm I'm millennia. Richardson's gonna do
that today. Okay. Right. No. Oh yeah. I mean, I,
I .
Okay, sounds good.
Member Richardson.
Okay.
So we
I'm sorry, I've been more focused on the future than
the current do it. So no, I can do it.
I just, I just needed a minute. Also. My child,
wasn't wanting to go to bed tonight and my husband's
out of town, so that's, what's going on in my
role anyway. Okay. So.
Relatively
better news.
For the projection of kind of where we are sitting
with the current FY 26 budget.
I mean, you, you can read 67% has a lapsed.
Elapsed 92% of funds, expended and encumbered, which does not
include future expenditures, such as remaining non-personnel expenses.
Expenses and debt services. So last month's report presented.
A projected deficit of
roughly between, you know, on a scale of upwards of.
1.5 million or something like that.
Within that projection.
Were
you know, expenses.
Expenses that likely are not going to come to fruition.
So Abigail pulled some of those out.
And as a result.
We have a better projection.
Of a one 70.
171,000 surplus to a million dollar deficit, which is that
range of those ABC choices.
So
the
audit has been finalized. The reconciliation processes are being drafted.
I, you know, to address some of the.
Weaknesses, what are we called? Audit findings.
Findings there is this beloved payroll encumbrance software. that
we have finally.
Been able to get going with the city and.
For just, just for some perspective, Abigail.
And team manually.
Enters encumbrances, which is a pretty intense.
And laborious process.
Believe it or not, there's actually software that does that.
Wow. so that is hopefully.
Maybe gonna be in place by may. I don't know,
but probably June.
Because you have to learn how to use it first,
also.
Fam the family medical leave.
Private option is what the district has.
Opted into and more information is forthcoming.
But I wish we could also show the, the projection,
the, the range of the potential.
Projected deficit, but I don't know if we have.
That available.
May I add one thing too. One thing that I
think people might find that, that software that's already something
the city had.
They just don't use it so right. We, but Abigail
has.
Negotiated with them and worked to get them to understand
that for the, for the school system, it really makes
sense.
So it's not something we're purchasing.
Thank you. You're all. You're all set. Yes, I'm good.
Thanks. Oh, thank you.
Second is the report of the policy committee.
And the minutes are included in the, from February.
So we have before us this evening.
The temperature standards for school facilities, which is a two-part.
First read, but the, and I want to thank.
Sarah Glenn for working with Harold Blaney on this as well,
because she was the one who.
Cleaned up, cleaned it all up, but.
The temperature standards. There's a front first page, which is.
The policy itself and the second page, which is marked
R.
I think it's supposed to be R is the, the,
the procedures that go with it. So that will be.
Up for first read and the second read.
Will be policy B E D H, which is public
participation at board meetings.
Meetings and at our next board meeting.
Jimenez yield Apollo is working on an equity policy, so
that fits.
In perfectly with what we're talking about tonight.
But that is on for the next meeting.
As well as board member or Richardson bringing forth the
agenda policy.
So that's all I have on that.
And now we're back to you member Dowling for report
on buildings and grounds.
Grounds. Thank you, Mr. Blaney's report.
Is is in your packet. It's it's.
It's the length that says report of the buildings and
grounds committee.
Has my name next to it, but that's that's Harold's
report. And then below that,
you have the minutes that's from me.
At the last meeting, I was really happy to welcome
two new members to the committee board member, feller and
board member rich are now members of the buildings and
grounds committee. And I, I don't know if that was
that they wanted to, to, or they got forced to
do that, but I'm happy to have them with us.
And so we spent most of, of the meeting.
Just kind of going over some of the recent history
in the school department with some of the.
Issues and challenges and opportunities we've had regarding buildings and
grounds.
Topics. And then at the next.
Upcoming buildings, grounds meeting, which is on March 25th.
It says on there that we're meeting at the large
conference room and technically we will be meeting there, but
we're going to be.
Learning more about the geothermal system at the middle school.
That's something that board, that committee members.
Have a lot of questions about, and Mr. Blaney is
more than happy to, to show us how that all
works.
The mysteries of, of geothermal. So that should be fun.
And that's what we'll be doing in March. I mean,
we're in March, but , I don't know. There's still,
I still, my brain is still in February. Thank you.
Thank you.
We are up to the consent agenda.
And I'm going to have the superintendent read.
What's on the consent agenda and then we'll have a
motion to approve.
The consent agenda.
Involves consideration and action to approve the consent agenda items
listed below 7.1.
Approval of the minutes from the regular meeting held on
February 9, 26.
Item 7.2 approval of the minutes from the special meeting
held on February 24.
Item 73.3 approval of the minutes from the board workshop
held on March 2nd.
7.4 approval of the donations grants as, as follows.
Follows $2,000 from Saco Biddeford savings as a scholarship for
a graduate.
Of the south Portland high school class of 2026 to
be selected by.
The south Portland high school scholarship committee.
Thank you very much. Could I have a motion to.
Accept the consent agenda, moved by member feller and seconded
by.
Member Richardson member Fowler. Do you have any comments?
Comments, I don't other than saying thank you for that
donation. Thank you for that donation. Great. Very nice.
.
Job. Okay. All those in favor.
And that's unanimous.
Okay. Great. And then we have 8.1 new business.
Consideration and action to approve as a first read.
Temperature standards for school facilities. Can I have a motion
to accept that?
So moved, moved by member Dowling.
And seconded by member Richardson. Any comments member Dowling?
I have no comments except to.
Thank the staff who worked on building the policy. Great.
Anything to add? Okay. All those in favor.
All right. And that is unanimous as well.
Consideration and action to approve PO policy B E D
H public participation at board meetings. And could I have
a motion to move that forward?
Move by member feller and seconded by member Dowling.
Any comments?
Comments? No, , that's a, that's an okay answer.
.
All those in favor.
Okay. And that's also unanimous consideration and action to approve.
The Southport high school, overnight field trip for students to
participate in the main music educators association.
All state conference and festival from May 14th to the 16th,
2026. I have a motion to approve by member Dowling
and seconded by.
Member Smith.
Any comments. I do have a, a question that possibly
the superintendent or assistant superintendent might be able to.
Answer when we get these.
Agenda items asking us to approve field trips.
Trips, are we merely approving the travel or are we
also approving.
Expenditure of, of funds.
Believe the, the, the purpose is to approve the travel.
Okay. Thank you. Great.
No other comments, all those in favor.
And that's unanimous. These all have included.
Included Alex Davidson joining in with us by the way.
Consideration and action to approve the south Portland high school
robotics, overnight field trips.
Trips March 13th to the 15th for the granite state qualifier
Bedford high school.
March 27th to the 29th for the U N H qualifier
at U N H Durham.
And April 16th to the 18th for the new England district
championship.
The big E so all somebody will move that move
by member Holman.
And seconded by member feller.
Any comments from the home.
Cool team. .
Thank you. Anything else? All right. All those in favor.
Okay. And that is unanimous, including Alex.
And we are at
second public comment. So before we go to second public
comment, I'm gonna go back to the board.
For comments on the budget or.
Closing things or anything you wanted to say? Remember Davidson.
Okay.
Thank you. What I wanted to say is reconfiguration is
a way to build equity and men, the disparities that
our community faces.
Faces, we cannot keep using bandaids to he systemic wounds.
Our community has the opportunity to grow. So let it
SoPo grows here. SoPo grows together. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Member Davidson, other comments, member Smith.
I have a lot of thoughts and feelings, but I'm,
I feel like I'm running on empty right now.
I do want to say.
Thank you to the administration, to Dr. Prince, especially for
presenting all of that information. It was.
It's a bit head spinning to take it all in.
We on the board only just saw this today. And
so are also taking in lots of information and deciding
these.
These issues. I just
I think really, I, I would not like to make
this decision this year and I totally agree with.
Members of the board and the public who have, who
have shared that. I don't know if that's gonna be
possible.
With what the city council is willing to.
Give us in terms of a tax increase, you know,
I think in an ideal world,
we would be able to increase enough to postpone this
decision in some way until next year, when we have
a superintendent in place.
And we have a board that's, you know,
four of us are here as of three months ago.
So I think.
There's just a real, it feels head spinning to make
a decision of this magnitude.
In our current situation.
And I don't know if there's any way around that.
I think it it's imperative.
That we at least have a conversation with the city
council before we move forward about what their willingness is
to accept a different percentage.
I think the idea of postponing.
A school closure for a year would allow us to
have a real conversation about reconfiguration of our district. That
a lot of folks here.
Want to have
and I'll just leave it at that.
I think there's a lot of, a lot of questions
here.
Member jelly. Thank you.
I too have a lot of.
Thoughts and feelings. I've written a lot of notes tonight
and like,
member Smith. I'm also running on empty.
My eyes are getting blurry and we're about 15 minutes
away from.
10 o'clock so I'm, I'm actually gonna hold most of
my.
Budget related.
Thoughts. I, I think can tell them next, the next
budget workshop, because.
Rarely do good things happen when we're here after 10
o'clock. So I don't want to contribute to that. Thank
you, member Fowler.
Yeah, I have a couple things to say. I just,
I need to say something funny and then I'll get
to the hard stuff. So I was really privileged to
be able to visit three schools this week and another
board members are gonna visit more schools next week.
I saw board member Davidson.
In class in Mr. Gross's AP biology class. I can
remember.
Report that board member Davidson was paying attention to the
excellent lesser lecture on messenger RNA. so good job.
Also someone thought I was the principal's son, so that
was.
Very interesting.
I'm not okay.
She
feedback on the budget overall. It's the administration.
I have little feedback to offer on your budget other
than the elementary schools, which I'll talk about in a
second, I trust you to make a, a budget that
minimizes harm.
To parents, so close to 300 parents.
Answered a survey expressing their thoughts about reconfiguration.
If we saw that kind of engagement associated with pushing
for a larger budget.
That would signal to the board that such a budget
budget has a chance of passing June's citizen referendum. Mm-hmm
. So without vocal support from the community, I am
not gonna be able to support a tax increase higher
than 6% because our budgets is just not gonna pass.
However, there is another alternative, which is the ask the
city council to sell Mahoney, to be used as housing
and use a portion or all of the proceeds to
improve the financial health of our district's schools.
This needs to be something that we're seriously considering. Okay.
Feedback on elementary proposal.
Even though grade level reconfiguration was not part of the
proposed plan this evening.
I feel the need to speak on it because I
think.
There, we don't have consensus on this board.
About grade level reconfiguration, I'm saying grade level reconfiguration because
all the options are reconfiguration. So grade level reconfiguration seems
more appropriate to me.
I wanna state that I've come to these views by
reviewing and responding to more than 75 emails from parents.
And having phone and zoom conversations was close to 30.
I've thought of little else over the past month.
To the parents you've made your voices heard loud and
clear. I'm sorry that this process feels rushed and that
you were required to turn out at a moment's notice.
So to the administration. Thank you for removing grade level
reconfiguration from the proposal.
I'm not opposed to consolidating elementary schools based on grade
levels in the future. And I understand that will improve
a lot of things, especially around instruction for students at
the margins.
Margins. However, the parent communities made it evident that such
a proposal has broad opposition and the inclusion of grade
level reconfiguration this year. Just this year alone.
Would put our budget at risk in June. And so
for that reason, I'm not gonna support any budget. That
includes grade level reconfigure at elementary schools this year.
With regard to school closure.
The way I'm thinking about this is I really wanna
minimize harm.
And so this is the lens that I'm thinking. And
every dollar we reduce on facility costs is a dollar
we can spend on our wonderful teachers and staff. All
right. Elementary schools are at 77% capacity.
That is not very high.
Tonight there's room for an additional 330 students in our
five existing elementary schools.
Of the two schools being discussed about possibly being closed.
I am not sure that Dyer is the right school
to be closed.
We've heard an outpouring of support.
For Dyer from current parents, it's a well loved school
in the centerpiece of a thriving neighborhood every night. For
the past three meetings, there have been 10 or more
parents speak on their love of Dyer.
Finally, I echo the statement of a parent tonight that
said that the board should have some kind of framework
for making a decision.
We could just kind of, you know, hold our fingers
in the air, see which way the winds are blowing.
But I think we should have a decision criteria for
this.
So I want to ask.
Do we think that's possible or.
Are we just gonna kind of come to this?
Ourselves. That's that's all I have to say. Thank you.
Amish.
I am a new member here, but I think I'm
in a minority and I think.
The theme should be
no closures and focus on cuts. And when I look
at that number.
Of the roof and that sort of expenditure.
That's about 5% of our budget.
Allocated to administrators.
And when you look at the administrators they're listed here.
If you cut one, that's about 7% of the population.
So, what we're looking at is one or two.
Directors being eliminated.
I think if we took our time.
And we looked at our administration more closely.
Maybe some of the assistants, maybe some of the new
positions we could buy ourselves some time to have a
new superintendent.
With a renewed focus.
On structural change.
If we don't do that now, and we simply close
dire, I think we're gonna have overloaded school classrooms.
Classrooms, we're gonna lose some of our progress.
I think it's just not being considered to dig deeper.
And cuts away from the staff that teach.
And do that now because we are contractually obligated to
let them know sooner.
Than the, the teachers. So it makes it that much
more quicker that we have to let them know.
Yeah. So remember that theme.
Cuts not closures.
Closures. Thank you.
Other members, no member Holman.
I, I have a couple of things and, and one
question.
First of all. I wanna comment on one thing. I
think that you can never get a beautiful public building,
like Mahoney back again.
And once you turn Mahoney, if Mahoney Mahoney's big enough
to do several things, including housing, it's an amazing building.
And if it's turned over to, to, if it, if
it goes, if we sell it just to the highest
bidder, it, I mean, I won't be able to probably
afford to walk in the door, nevermind buy anything there.
I would really, I would be really so sad if
Mahoney just became a bunch of high high-end condos. I
hope that never happened. I've always advocat.
Advocated for keeping Mahoney public building. And you know, whether
that includes housing, that would be great. But I don't,
you can never get that back. You go to Europe
and you see these beautiful public buildings. You can't believe
what they've kept.
Come on. Let's not, let's not make that mistake again
for a short term gain. There's someone talked to today,
very movingly about.
Continuity for students that, that have of a highest need
special needs students. Excuse me, if I'm not on the
right terminology. Exactly. But I wonder.
If we were to reconfigure, could there still be some
kind of like multi-year classroom approach for some of those
students? That's just a question out there. I'm not proposing
anything. I don't know enough to be in a position
to propose.
But
losing when we mean to be very careful about our,
our, the CA the teaching, the ed, the pedagogical capital
that we possess, which is rich. We, you know, we,
we are very rich in pedagogical capital. We heard it
from a teacher saying how, you know, came from another
district. We need to really careful of preserve that. Not
that we're, I mean,
with the student teacher ratio we have right now.
I understand that some positions may be lost, but you
know, when we.
If we, if we're planning to, I mean, we, we.
We've heard it said again and again, we have to
have those supports and, and so supports for students.
Students. So, although
I, I don't like any of our choices. Well,
I, you know, I, I, I lean on the reconfiguration
side and maybe we don't have time to do it.
Maybe waiting makes sense, but I don't think it's gonna,
I think kicking the can down the road may end
up being very costly for us and we may need
to really.
Take do something sooner.
Because because tax increases really do matter.
You could get the budget refused. And we have a
lot of people who aren't fixed incomes. We're an old
state. We have a lot of old people here.
Who, and I'm not, I'm still working. Okay. I'm not,
I'm not one of 'em yet, but, but, but, but
you know, we, we that's, we have to really think
about that. These are not people who have income growth,
potential. Right? Who do we wanna be able to livehere?
Right. So I, I just really feel strongly about that.
And I think our, I wanna say I, we are
so fortunate to have ABA, Abaco, Abigail catchin, to work
for us on the budget, who is projecting quite far
out. And those that's not what we show all the
time, but I'm sure if she, we, maybe you could
do see about making an appointment with her and seeing
what she's doing. It's amazing. We didn't. We had.
We went through, we were, we were.
Just quit quitting after quitting a budget people for the
whole, the whole time. This is my first year of
being about six years on the, on the school board
where we have someone who's actually working hard and planning.
I hope to stay where the handcuffs better start with
getting outta name. Right. Well, it's, it's a really big
thing. Very important for us. I'm sorry. I know it's
very.
Late. I thought the comment about portables was a valid
one. Mm-hmm I think we do need to think
about that. And there are options in this thing and,
you know,
excuse me, Julia. I know with that, actually, there was
a proposal all there. Some of those, not every single
scold school closure configuration is in this thing, but it
does have every school mentioned. So, you know, small is
a, on it. Brownie is on, on different, different configurations.
So I just want say that.
We do have, I think we really do have to
make some hard choices now and we can't make everybody
happy.
And, and yes, it would be nice if things could
be all in place. I would prefer that, but let's,
let's hang let's, let's try and let's, let's try and
you know, let's anyway, that's all. I mean, I do.
I also wanna say that, I think that the, the
VCs at Cal is of reasonable concern.
It is a reasonable concern.
And that should be, that should be understood very well
before we make a final decision. Thank you. Sorry.
That, that, that was one thing I did mean to
say.
With the questions, because there were a lot of comments
that were about Kayla. And I just wanna say again,
there are 11 tanks.
Tanks nine of them are empty.
They're we have worked with the de with the D
E P.
With what? And with water resource, both on air quality.
And on the issue of water runoff.
That there, the report has been that there's no concerns
there.
So I, I just did mean to, and if we
looked at.
Oil oil tanks. There are oil tanks near Calor. There
are oil tanks near Dyer. There are oil tanks near
small.
So that, that
if we're going to consider that we need to look
at all those neighborhoods.
Neighborhoods, those aren't my comments, but I'm gonna go to
board member Richardson.
Thanks.
I, I did wanna say.
That reconfiguration and closure of all of our elementary schools
is here.
And it is, it is specked out. It was presented
at last board meeting.
Such that there was at least a general understanding of
what that, what that would look like. The minutiae of
it.
Not worked out and understandably so, but.
I
have been
basically spending every extra minute of my life, thinking about
this proposal and the impact on our community.
I
know that the district is, is doing everything it can
to put forth a presentation that.
Is thoughtful and comprehensive.
But it's really hard to, to get that presentation at
four o'clock.
Two hours before that meeting. And it's frustrating to hear
that administrators had a presentation at 7 45 this morning.
And potentially we could have had more of today to,
to review it.
I I understand the need to be.
Getting the, you know, getting the details right. In a
presentation, but.
It does come off a little bit as.
As it's like kind of avoiding.
Conflict or
trying to be secretive.
And I I'm sure that's not the intention, but it,
but it feels that way.
And it just really hard to be prepared. And I
just wanna say to the community, these are district proposals
to the board. This is not the board saying.
Let's close dire or close skill in, you know, we
are, we are relying on.
The expertise of our, of our administrators.
To, to, to provide us with a proposal. And then
we.
Ask the questions, but again, we're having to ask questions
in a very short period of time.
With significant impact. And you know, my dream is that
we postpone.
Big long-term
infrastructure decisions.
Decisions, you know, strategic goals until we have the right
leader in place to help us with that decision making.
I'm not sure that
that that, that, that funding from the city's fund balance.
Is a no, I, I think city counselors, there are
some city counselors that are actually trying to get to
that answer from, from the finance manager.
So I don't
don't wanna just write that off as a.
As a no. Is it gonna, would it be.
Taboo or unheard of.
Maybe, but
you know, it is, it is, it is hard to
hear it's all from the same pool when.
They have a $12 million.
Fund reserve and we have nothing.
And yet they're asking voters to potentially spend a bajillion
dollars.
On a, on a, on a pretty controversial project with,
with Mahoney and, and here we are.
Potentially getting gutting our schools and, and, and filling our
classrooms.
Classrooms with, with more needs for teachers. So.
But
I think one thing that I.
It is unpopular, but I do want to talk about
pre-K.
pre-K I I've never felt like the pre-K program that
we offer is, is a really viable option for people.
However, I don't know who it, who it, I don't
understand.
But I know, or I hope that it's fulfilling a
need for some, for a child who has no access
to education. So is there a way to make that
program?
Totally and only accessible.
For a population based on socioeconomic status.
I don't know that we're in a position to say
yes at another pre-K classroom this year. I believe that's
embedded in the proposal and additional pre-K classroom for next
year. I have, I have some concerns about that.
Given given the cuts, I've also seen a number of
resignations from pre-K teachers.
Teachers, and I'm kind of questioning some of that and,
and, and, and it is there a.
Systemic issue going on there, but I, I feel like
we've seen at least two or three of those.
In the past several months.
We don't know the student-teacher to ratio.
In these budget cuts and, and that is an alarming.
Void to not know. I'm also really concerned about exacerbating
the equity issue by putting more, sending more children to
skill.
Skilling. I think that that really needs to be understood
in terms of the allocation of where students go.
To at least try to achieve some status of inequitable
distribution.
And not perpetuating an issue that.
That we know is an issue.
Yeah, that's it.
And thank you. I know. I mean, we're all exhausted.
And Joe, you're got a million.
Thousand different numbers going in your head and Abigail as
well. And.
Principals. Thank you for having really tough conversations about people
that you see every day. I.
I, I, I feel that I also feel.
Just terrible for
the, the fear that our teachers are walking around with
every day, not knowing and.
And it is, it is, it is.
It's awful that we're up against this clock. You know,
that George is talking about.
And yeah, it just feel, it just feels way too
fast.
Other comments from the board. I don't wanna speak until
I per we're. We're not at the second public comment
yet. We're we're gonna get there. Okay. Thank you.
I, I will say I, I haven't made any comments
all night, so.
But I, I will say I'm not willing to go
back to the city council to ask for more money.
So in, in order to do that, you need to
have four votes to do it. So if you can
get that, that's great. I'm just not gonna be one
of them. So.
I, I think
the other thing I would say is to remember that
our constituent group are not just the people who show
up here tonight.
But they're all the people in this community, like.
Every person who pays. And I know I say this
over and over.
61% of their property taxes.
Taxes to education. They're all our constituents. It's not just
the voices. We hear the emails we get or the
people who show up.
So I was thinking about this earlier today and I
was thinking.
That I have friends.
From 41 different countries.
41 different countries. And.
And I know people from 12 additional countries, but there's
195 countries in this world. So that means I still
in my lifetime have to find friends and 142 more
of them.
So some of the gifts that I've received from having
friends from around the world include the chance to eat
delicious food and even cook some of it and to
learn a few words in other languages and to hear
stories of difference. But the big gift is that I'm
reminded of my privilege.
And when I'm paying attention.
I'm reminded of this fact.
Constantly. And that is a gift.
So last week I was driving on Brighton avenue and
I was feeling overwhelmed about this budget and I stopped
at the Baker's bench in Westbrook.
And I bought two pieces of pastry for $7 and
72 cents.
Cents. And as I was chomping on a huge cinnamon
roll, I turned on the radio.
To a program that was about Alice.
And Alice is the acronym that stands for.
Asset limited income restrained.
Employed. And it's a United way designation for working households
that earn above the federal poverty level.
But cannot afford basic necessities like housing, food, and childcare.
That's the reason I'm not going back to the city
council to ask for more money.
It also refers to a safety protocol.
For active shooters alert, lockdown.
Inform counter and evacuate.
Evacuate. I stop chomping to ask myself the question I
try to ask every day.
Did you do meaningful work today?
I drive my friend to work every morning at six
15, because he still doesn't feel safe.
And as a bipo, he is often terrified. And every
day he says, thank you.
And he feels he's inconveniencing me. And every day I
say, I'm the fortunate one to know you.
I'm reminded that I'm not the one who's afraid.
So getting out of bed at 6:00 AM is not a
hardship.
I had dinner last week with a friend from Iraq
who works two jobs.
One of them is an ed tech at Portland high
school, and someone drives him to work. And when he
finishes, he goes to the Y M C a until
it's dark, when he feels safer to walk home. And
then he sits in his living room with only a
candle. Careful not to draw attention.
I'm reminded that I'm privileged.
For no good reason, but I'm privileged and I'm grateful
to learn from him.
My son is a genocide survivor, and I know the
stories of what he witnessed as a young child.
Nothing. Anyone should have to endure, but he lives with
it quietly. Although the trauma is real.
I have listened to the concerns here and many have
said.
That our school represents our community. So I wanna say
this budget is a community problem.
And there are people living amongst us who are far.
Less privileged.
Than I am. That's for sure.
People who are economically challenged, who walk across entire continents
to get here, who live on limited incomes with far
less than I have from all groups.
I heard from over a dozen people.
With concerns, just like we heard tonight over the air
quality for students at Kayla's school, citing all the reasons
we should close it.
But not one of them was from a Caler parent.
And as I cited at the last meeting, nine of
those 11 tanks are empty. There's no basement at Caler.
I've met with water resource and with D E P.
And those students have been in that school for decades,
decades.
And not one person has come forth with deep concerns
for the wellbeing of those students.
Students until now that's your privilege.
I found myself wondering
how it might feel if it doesn't or more parents
from Kayla wrote to give all the reasons why we
should close small school.
Citing the air quality in that area. There are tankers.
There are cruise ships.
They're a tugboats there's air.
Pollution that from airplanes.
Airplanes and more, that must affect the air quality of
that neighborhood after all.
Water surrounds that entire neighborhood.
Yet not one parent has come forth to say.
Gee. What about the air quality in the small neighborhood?
That must be dangerous for kids. Not one.
Not one.
Some believe that our most important constituent group is students
and parents.
While I completely support.
That this is an important piece of what we do.
I wanna go back to what board member Holman said.
I would say that we are elected to be responsible
to all our resident groups, students, parents, seniors, renters, homeowners,
each economically challenged our staff, all of the.
Every one of them.
Everyone.
In every group is equally important.
Not just the ones who came here and sat until
10 o'clock to speak.
They're not the only I've I've people who can't get
out of their wheelchair to show up here, but they're
also a resident.
And I'm also responsible to them.
So being on the board means considering all of them.
What I'm about to say won't be popular with some
people. My goal is twofold. First. We must reduce the
budget by over 7 million.
It's not a deficit. It's not a shortfall.
It's not, and it is to keep us within a
6% increase.
An increase in this budget.
Not anything, but a 6% increase in our spending. And
for me,
this proposal tonight.
Keeps white schools, white.
It keeps privilege in only parts of the city. It
keeps iPOC kids in the same place. They've been since
2019.
Not any change that looks like satisfying a particular portion
of the population to the detriment of the rest.
But that is the definition of privilege.
When someone says to me, well, I don't believe in
white privilege. I respond by saying.
Actually you've just proven its existence.
Just by saying that
you've proven its existence. I've received dozens of letters and
a few of them.
Some resulting in phone conversations have been thoughtful and insightful.
And a parent started to say something to me and
I stopped him.
When he was saying that there was a disequilibrium in
terms of favoring.
People who are renters because they don't pay taxes. And
I stopped and said,
everyone pays taxes, even renters. And here's how.
And he acknowledged at the end of the conversation, you've
changed my mind. And I appreciate that. And I appreciated
his openness.
But one parent wrote
wrote and she spoke tonight. Proximity matters.
Community matters. History matters.
But so does distribution of need.
So does scale. So does weather, our systems allow educators
to do the best for students?
Students that hit me. I read it over and over.
Do we see the differences?
There are many benefits to grade level configuration and I
support it. And I think we have time to do
it.
I think it's good for kids.
Really good. And I believe it outweighs all the drawbacks.
Drawbacks, mostly that are about inconvenience.
And a distaste for change.
Both of which I understand, but I believe there's good
in there. I believe that if kids.
Get to live in the space with others who don't
look like them. Don't sound like them.
Might struggle with learning or learn faster might live in
a majority.
A majority of his life in silence or in a
wheelchair.
Might be someone
who walked across a continent to get here? I think.
Those lessons are important.
They're valuable and they're powerful. And I think they matter
and I continue to support those changes while a majority
of this board may wanna move forward with a proposal
like this tonight.
I would caution that decision. I have had teachers contact
me who have voiced the positives of grade level reconfiguration.
And when I say those are great thoughts, will you
say that tonight? The answer I get is it's not
safe for me to speak up.
So I'm not speaking just for me, but I'm speaking
for those who cannot.
Will not or dare not speak.
Because their voice matters to.
Thank you. I'm gonna go to public comment.
Madam chair, is it, is it okay? I have already
used my three minutes, so I don't want to, no,
you be in breached. You can speak again. Second. Wonderful.
Thank you. Appreciate that. And thank you for your, for
your very moving words. Just there.
Thank you for clarifying that the district underg undergoes an
independent and annual audit.
After reviewing the report while I was seated the.
My understanding is that it focuses primarily on financial statements.
And certain compliance requirements.
Not broader budgeting decisions or.
Long-term financial oversight.
And the audit also noted. I'm speaking from the last
one that the school department exceeded its authority.
To expend funds did not vote certain budget transfers and
omitted some fund activity from data.
Submitted to the state, but given the repeated budget challenges,
the district has faced.
I still believe that a broader.
Independent review of budgeting and financial oversight would still be
valuable to help the community.
Better understand how we arrived here.
And you know how similar.
Issues can be avoided in the future just for the
help of everybody. Thank you so much. Thank you very
much.
Ms. Lasar
hi, my name's Jennifer Lazard. I live.
In south Portland, 13 Boley.
Vocally. I work for the school department for transportation.
I am the president of the service employees association.
I don't do public speaking, but tonight I have to
.
I don't think the communication we've had with the district
has been very forthcoming.
Compared to last year, I feel like.
As a union.
Representative I've been left out of the loop a lot.
And that's not a very good feeling.
I just wanted to say that.
pre-K
pre-K Richardson. You mentioned something about pre-K.
pre-K I have concerns with transportation.
Last time we, there was the budget meeting.
You had mentioned we had 69 seats and a possibility
of having another 200.
On the buses, we need a bus aid.
With those pre-K kids. You're looking at cutting 14.
Of our, from my unit.
Where are those bats aids coming from? We don't have
enough right now.
Where are you gonna get more for those 200?
pre-K seats. If most of them are transported.
The other thing is
the bus, you mentioned buying a new bus this year.
The bus that we had the accident with was a
small bus. The bus that was bought was a big
bus.
You're cutting 14 positions.
Positions where's that bus driver for that bus?
There probably isn't gonna be one.
We won't don't need a new bus. If we don't
have a bus driver.
These are things that
need to be considered.
There's different aspects, but there's transportation.
Custodial, some of the schools.
Aren't being cleaned right now to the standard that.
The teach, the principals are used to.
Cuz we're already short staffed with custodial we're down to
custodians.
Transportation. We're already down two bus drivers.
And we're looking at mucus food service.
We won't go there. You know, there's.
There's more to all of us.
You know, the service employees we're at the bottom.
You wanna cut us?
You know, we're on the butcher block, just like everybody
else.
We got saved last year, we knew this was coming
this year.
But you've gotta consider
the numbers. We're a very small.
Group. There's like a hundred of us with all three.
You know, departments. So
30 seconds, Jeff. One to say, thank you. Thank you
very much.
Okay. We are at the, there are more people with
public comments. Okay. I got it.
Lauren Shapiro Deak street.
I ask that the agenda is posted at least 24
hours before these meetings so that the community staff and
board members have enough time to do a thorough review
of such dense detail.
Board member, Dean, you speak about. And on behalf of
those that cannot show up here tonight.
The current setup of this meeting, restricts access to provide
access across our community. I ask that this meeting is
made more accessible to all community members.
By there being able to pump public comment like anyone
else here.
However that can be done. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Hold on.
Public common is closed.
The last thing on our agenda is.
School board communications. I'm gonna ask the board.
To limit this to communications, not statements of philosophy, not,
but, you know, just, do you have something that you
would like to share about an event that's coming up?
You know, something you would like to invite the public
to that, that sort of thing. Does anybody have.
Anything to add.
Member Davidson. I have something to say that's important. And
I think I should be heard as a student in
this school system who is impacted by the decisions made
in this room.
Board member feller. I expect better.
As someone who is interested in the inner workings of
the classroom.
You showed this by visiting my AP biology class. I
wish that you would formulate your opinion, not just by
listening to the grievances of the privileged parents you have
communicated with.
But also the teachers who teach the students of those
parents and who know the reality and needs within the
classroom.
And the com community members who will.
Shoulder the burden of inaction in ignorance. If we do
not confront the real problems we face.
Thank you. That's all I have.
That that's fine. Thank you very much. Member Davidson. Does
anybody else have a board communication they'd like to share?
Seeing none without objection, this meeting is adjourned. Thank you.